# CHAPTER IV

#### THE CAPE STATION AND WEST COAST OF AFRICA

Having done my courses at Greenwich and Portsmouth and completed a little ill-earned leave, I presented myself at the Second Sea Lord's office and asked if I could be sent to the west coast of Africa. Whoever it was saw me seemed a little surprised, but thought it could be arranged; my idea was that it was off the beaten track, and things might happen.

I was appointed to the *Phoebe*, listed as a third-class cruiser, and left Southampton in the Union Line *Norman* bound for Capetown. On board I found one other naval passenger, Jim Ferguson, going out as First Lieutenant of the *Baracouta*, and two soldiers, Challoner of the West India Regiment and Holford of the Seventh Hussars, the latter very anxious about the shape of his leg—he could not be induced to walk up and down the deck in case he should not be able to wear his new hessians.

Eric Drummond, later to be British representative at Geneva, and an ambassador was also on board, and Solly and Wolf Joel, the latter shot soon afterwards in his office at Johannesburg.

Arrived in Simonstown I found the *Phoebe* away up the east coast and I was told to join the *Monarch*. A curious survival, the *Monarch*, I forget her main armament, but in the stern she had a 10-inch muzzle-loading gun, my charge for the time being. 

Simonstown was then, as now, a very charming little place; there was no breakwater, or new dockyard, so that all ships lay out in the bay, to dock we had to go round to Capetown.

There were no metalled roads, and the alternative to walking or riding was the Cape cart, or for heavier traffic, the bullock wagon; up the line was not the easy matter it is now in the days of motor-cars. Sir Harry Rawson was the very popular C-in-C. and there was a fairly large garrison whose headquarters were at Wynberg, which helped the social side of life; the regiment we knew best were the 60th Rifles so many of whom were killed shortly after in the Boer War.

At that time, a year or so after the Jamieson Raid, feeling in South Africa ran high. Cecil Rhodes was living at Groot Schurr, lately returned from England and the Bow Street Trials. I had the honour of lunching with him; it was a big party and we lunched on the stoep—why I, an obscure sub-lieutenant, was drawn into this party I don't know. Sydney Rolleston, my captain, took me; the latter was incidentally a very charming character and a very keen cricketer, and always ran the ship's cricket team. He kept wicket and I bowled, so that I suppose I got to know him better than a sub-lieutenant usually knows his captain. Apart from everything else he always saw that I, as junior officer in the ship, was not left out, and that was why I suppose I was asked to the luncheon party. I wish now I knew all the people who were there, probably I have met many of them since. Cecil Rhodes did not talk much, he seemed preoccupied and gloomy as well he may have been. I know now so much more about him and his work, which everywhere in South Africe and in Rhodesia one can see come to fruition. It is a little satisfaction to think at least one met him and shook him by the hand, few men can leave behind them such imperishable monuments to a short life's work.

To make up for Rhodes's silence I remember Miss Rhodes, his sister, talked all the time and on every sort of subject.

The Cape was, of course, at that time a British colony; English was the universal language. There was no hint then about Africaans as a language, except among the coloured people. The many folk of Dutch origin who of course knew High Dutch, as it was called, always spoke English, and reproved their children should they be heard talking Kaffir or kitchen Dutch.

Now all that is changed and even English-born people go out of their way or have in the course of business to speak Africaans. The Cape, so long British, has been merged into the Union of South Africa. Natal, also at that time a British colony with its own governor, has also come into the Union. Rhodesia was not yet officially Rhodesia but still Mashonaland and Matabeleland.

The South African War with all its resulting bitterness had not yet been fought and now, nearly forty years later, we are watching the gradual healing of old wounds and the
amalgamation of the old British colonies with the then Transvaal and Orange Free State.

Farther north the Rhodesias North and South, together with Nyasaland forming another great and separate realm are even now, perhaps, on the point of merging into one.

##### WEST COAST OF AFRICA, 1898-9

In 1898 there was trouble at Sierra Leone about the payment of a hut tax which had recently been imposed by the Government, and to Sierra Leone we were ordered, calling at St. Helena and Ascension for coal. Ascension was then administered as a ship, captain, first lieutenant and crew complete, and as there was at that time no cable and ships seldom called, the island was very much cut off from the world.

Arriving at Freetown, Sierra Leone, we found the conditions somewhat serious. There had been widespread murdering in the surrounding districts, of all English-speaking natives, and under the leadership of what was known as the Human Leopard Society, some horrible atrocities had been committed. The quarrel having begun as opposition to the collection of the hut tax, had developed into attacks by the aboriginal tribes on the inhabitants of Freetown, the descendants of the old liberated slaves many, and now most, of whom have no language but English. Those of them who were caught outside the town were mostly killed, and there was even some idea that the town itself might be attacked.

At that time Freetown had as garrison a battalion of the West India Regiment, fine-looking men on parade, but quite unsuitable for West Africa work. They were West Indian blacks of the same stock as the inhabitants of Freetown, but owing to their more recent life in the West Indies were not really much in touch with the local people. Moreover, they were no more immune than the white man from malaria or able to find their way through bush, as natives appear to do by instinct.

It is interesting to remember that at that time at Freetown Colonel Ross had been carrying out his experiment to show the mosquito was the villain in the malaria picture and I well remember how the old coast birds scoffed at the idea. Malaria, was of course, due to chills in the evening mist from the marshes, and if you didn't take too much alcohol before sundown and plenty afterwards, it would be all right. Under this prescription more or less faithfully carried out, especially as making up for lost time after was concerned, many died, but there were some surprising survivals. Men who had been on the coast many years and appeared as hard as you could wish—seasoned in fact.

To return to the West India Regiment, shortly after our arrival they marched out into the bush, by way of inflicting punishment on some centre of the malefactors, they were ambushed and lost, most of their white officers killed or wounded, including the Colonel, and that stopped that. And when it was reported that “the war boys” as they were called, were marching on the town, there was something like a panic for a bit, a hasty enrolment of volunteers, who were served out with red cloth armlets, and very proud they were of them.

Steps were taken to form from local friendly tribes what has since become the famous West Africa Rifles or now the African Frontier Force.

Goodwyn of the Devonshire Regiment, afterwards killed in South Africa, formed I think, the first company, and watching the drill was most interesting. I wonder how many of the present-day West Africa Rifles can even imagine the beginning of the regiment on the parade ground at Freetown. The chief drill instructor, a band boy of the West India Regiment, armed with a swagger cane, a line of nearly naked savages, the small boy in his swagger zouave uniform pulling and pushing them into a line and then giving himself the order “Quick march”, and stepping off to show them how it was done. Usually they started off, some and not others, and the whole process had to be repeated over and over again until there was a pretty unanimous start and then to stop, the order “Halt” in a shrill voice with a lightening run down the line and a smart rap on each bare tummy. “About tu-r-r-n”, whack, whack, whack, along the line of shins and round they went and so on until they had got used to all the simple orders and could be moved about as a body. In the bush they were at once at home; no boots, no clothes, very little commissariat—they could go anywhere.

With the formation of the West Africa Rifles, “the vultures” began to arrive. “The vultures” was the nickname we gave to the large number of army officers who always mysteriously got seconded from their regiment and turned up wherever trouble was brewing. Freetown was soon full of them, mostly fresh from the Egyptian Campaign lately finished. We made a short expedition down to Liberia and on to see the Governor of the Gold Coast at Accra. On our return we found plans advanced for several columns to advance simultaneously to clean up the country and enforce the hut tax, and to my joy I was to be lent to one column with two seamen crews and machine-guns.

We were to start away up the Bumpeh River in the Countess of Derby, the Governor's paddle-yacht. She was quite small and particularly insanitary for the some two hundred officers and men we had on board. There was standing room only, and an eight-hours' sea passage before we got to the river bar on which we lay for another hour or two, waiting for water and heaving our souls out. Every one was glad when soon after daylight we entered the placid river water and slid up between the mangroves.

Mangroves, creeks, and crocodiles supplies a sufficient description of any West African river when the hand of man has not yet made its mark.

Higher up, the mangrove swamps grew less, and forest trees, bird life, and monkeys began to appear, and then the first episode. The river had got very narrow, the overgrown banks brushing the paddleboxes from time to time, a close look-out was being kept, and no one knew exactly where the stockade was we had come to capture. Some distance ahead we saw some natives; they shouted and shook spears and swords, one flung himself into the water and swam for the opposite bank, the others vanished into the bush. A hurried consultation, and it was decided the swimmer must be stopped by a volley as he left the water—and I had seen the first man killed in anger. A boat was lowered and the body examined for tribal marks, etc., and on we went to a place called Kandobe. At this point the river divided, and on the point of division was a trading settlement, now wrecked, and the bodies of the traders rather high, lying just where they fell and covered with flies. These had to be buried by one party while others went off to reconnoitre, and in due course returned with a prisoner, at which the O.C. was particularly pleased, as he felt sure they could bribe him or otherwise induce him to show them the road to the village or stockade. That night was a bad one, the mosquitoes were all-devouring and nearly stampeded the close-huddled men and carrier coolies crowded together on the well deck, while for us camped on the paddleboxes it was not much better. We greased our faces, necks, and hands well with a mixture of vaseline and tar-oil, useful but neither clean nor pleasant on a hot tropical night.

Morning came and the column moved off with the prisoner-turned-guide at the head. I was left as garrison with some details, mostly sick, which I didn't relish—I was the doctor minus any medical knowledge. My second in command was a sergeant of the Gordons, as it turned out rather a broken reed.

The Countess of Derby, I should explain, had a civilian captain and a civilian chief engineer, old men both in years of life and years of service on the coast, and they hated each other like poison, a fact of which I was at first completely ignorant.

The column, if they hit the right path, hoped to finish the business in a few hours, and then push on again up the river, in any case they were to return to the ship before dark. Night fell and no sign of the soldiers, and I suddenly found myself left to make decisions of some moment. My chief counsellor, the captain, old enough easily to be my grandfather, was all for clearing out, he had all the coaster's contempt for regular soldiers marching about the bush. “They've all been scuppered long ago and we shall be too if you stop here, a fool business”; curiously enough, as it seems looking back at it, he never took up the line “I’m going,” if he had, I don't see I should have had any option but to go too.

My second counsellor was the sergeant; he also feared the worst, but he was much more certain we ourselves were going to be attacked at any moment.

The first night he had me up about every ten minutes with the alarming news that he heard the war drums or could actually see men moving about in the bush. We were, I may say, only some five or six yards off either bank. All the next day we waited, and for twelve more days. I was determined I wouldn't leave because I felt that even if they had got into bad trouble, some details would certainly escape and naturally make their way back to the ship, the only possible place they could make for.

My sergeant very soon joined forces with the captain and both were determined we should get out, as they said, “Why have our throats cut as well.” Why indeed! But although I didn’t altogether enjoy the position, and I knew I was going to get all the blame should things go wrong, I had my machine-guns and I knew if we were not surprised we were quite safe. Amusing dinner-parties we had on the paddlebox, the skipper, the chief engineer, and myself. The skipper and chief never spoke, each had his paper of salt and pepper and possibly a bit of butter, or I had a tin of butter or biscuits, the palm-oil chop in the middle of the table was common property. The conversation used to Start something like this: “Mister, we ought to get out to-morrow morning, no sense in staying now,” and I would murmur: “Let's see how the night goes.” The chief: “Salt, Mister ----” the skipper's long arm shot out and emptied salt out of his paper on my plate. “Funny manners people have. Two sons at Oxford College, that's what I have, mister; he wouldn't know what that means.” And so it went on, as the whisky was used to keep the malaria out, tempers got sharper, but bedtime came very early for the two old gentlemen and they lumbered off to some cubby-hole, and in spite of the danger so often expressed as to the position, I never remember seeing them about at night. My own men were suffering a good deal. I could not induce them to keep covered up, more especially to wear boots, to which they were not accustomed, and their feet and ankles were badly swelled with mosquito and mango-fly bites.

My sergeant, too, developed malaria, which kept him less fearful, but an added anxiety and I spent much time poring over the book of words supplied with the medicine chest.

As each and every tropical disease ended the list of symptoms by the sentence “Followed by syncope coma and death” the book was not exhilarating, especially as I never knew what syncope was.

But we hadn't been idle by any means, during the day refugees had been coming in and the question of food was getting acute. I had given orders no more refugees, only to break it myself, when a woman appeared and wanted to be taken on board; she had escaped from the massacre at Kandobe and been hidden all the time in the bush, an English-speaking native of Freetown. I began to explain that we couldn't take any more as already we had more than we could properly feed. “Have got chop, master,” said the lady dragging an unfortunate little monkey out of the folds of the rug affair she wore around her.

Every day I made expeditions up and down the river, and up various creeks in the dinghy, two men pulling, one in the bows with a rifle ready, and myself in the stern. At first it seemed the whole countryside was deserted, but I was soon made aware we were watched. Going up a creek one day, I spotted under the bushes a war canoe, moored up awash. After examining it, I decided to go a little farther, meaning to bale out and tow the canoe back to the ship on the return journey; by the time we returned, however, not more than half an hour, it was gone. There could be no doubt at all that we had been watched all the time, and perhaps unpleasant to think how close we might have been at any moment to the point of a poised spear or the muzzle of a bundook. I told the Captain of my experience, and his hair nearly stood on end, and indeed, it seemed to me pretty serious. What was that canoe doing there? Did they really think of trying to board, I couldn't help but think it was highly unlikely. The tribes had much too much respect for whitemans ju-ju to attack, and we had not neglected to let the machine-guns rattle a few rounds every day, both as a signal to our people and to impress any of them thinking of taking liberties.

The next day I determined to investigate that creek still farther, and was far more successful than I had hoped. Coming round a bend there was the stockade right in front of us and we seemed to have completely surprised them. A fearful hubbub and lots of firing of bundooks; as the range of these loaded with buckshot and nails might have been sixty or seventy yards, and we were a good two hundred, all was well, but we lost no time, and reversing the boat and pulling away, pursued at first by a mob on each bank. It seemed that they might be able to cut a corner and head us off. However, the reeds and mangroves intervened and we were soon back to the Countess. It seemed evident to me that the stockade had never been attacked, if it had we were near enough to have heard the firing, the inhabitants must have known of our presence all the time, also of the fate or whereabouts of the column. Actually they knew what I didn't; the column, thanks to the prisoner, as guide, had been led well out of the district, the guide had then escaped leaving them hopelessly bushed.

Obviously I could do nothing without help. I had located the village which was undoubtedly the one we were looking for, but there was still no news of the column and no means of communicating as far as I could see, except by going back in the *Countess of Derby* and leaving the river, which I was loathe to do without something more definite. I secured a refugee boy who said he knew the country and could go anywhere, and I sent him off with a note to the resident at Lokoja, a station in friendly country some thirty miles away, and then waited.

Two days, perhaps three, elapsed and in the early morning a big war canoe was seen coming up the river, chanting as they paddled. This really raised a scare, all hands joined in the demand to shoot. The black pilot was convinced they were war boys, the skipper and chief were both convinced but through my telescope I could see the red fez of a frontier policeman in the bows, and at the worst I knew I could make shorter work of the war canoe at twenty yards than three hundred; along they came.
Arrived alongside there was a great palaver and the
policeman, very important, produced a message from Lokoja that he had with him three hundred Yonnies and
that they would clear up the stockade if I would show them where it was and generally direct.

A lot of interpreting went on; explanations and eventual agreement that the friendlies were to cross the river lower down and attempt to surround the village. As soon as I heard firing I was to come along up the river and help with the machine-guns.

However, no one seemed to make a move and it was eventually explained that the friendlies were afraid to cross unless I went down and saw them, the ship ju-ju being no good it was explained.

The main body was waiting some half a mile down the river and an interesting scene presented itself. Following the war canoe we turned into a creek which opened into a lagoon or big pond.

The canoe stopped paddling and the headman shouted out something, immediately the whole force entirely concealed in the bushes stood up and saluted, by raising spears or guns over their heads, and then quickly got into canoes by which they had apparently travelled and started crossing the river. The afternoon was getting on by now and the attack was to take place soon after daylight the next morning. The operation was a complete success, the friendly boys closed in, and although I was in position only a few minutes after the sound of firing, the business was over, the war boys had fled and were being pursued into the bush, and my friend the policeman was busy setting fire to the whole place. The surprise seems to have been complete, and the headman killed in the first attack, the remainder bolted. The arms of the dead man, a long-barrelled trade gun and an old cutlass I have now, as a memento of only time I was, or am likely to be, in charge of an operation carried out entirely by natives.

Soon after we returned to the ship, we sighted a small steamboat coming up the river, she had been sent from Freetown to tell us the column had returned overland and that we were to come back. We had been fourteen days away and during that time I had not had my clothes off or washed, while at the same time copious application of grease and tar-oil to keep the flies off had not improved my personal appearance. But curiously enough, I was very fit, which was more than I found my shipmates. With the exception of the captain, all the officers were down with malaria, and some seventy men, the paymaster and an R.N.R. lieutenant had been invalided home, and after an exchange of cables we sailed for Ascension to recoup.

Ascension was then, as I have already said, run as a ship. There was in those days a very familiar yellow form generally used in ships called “A Casual Issue Note”. In Ascension you filled in and signed a casual issue note for every sort of thing, from a horse to ride and carry you up Green Mountains to a house to live in when you got there, together with permission to shoot rabbits and goats—the former were plentiful and good sport, the latter rare and difficult; there were also wild donkeys. I and some others spent three or four days on the mountain and thoroughly enjoyed it. It is, of course, delightful after a long spell on the coast, to get away into mists and scenery that might almost be Devon. Of other interests in Ascension such as sea fishing, Wide Awake Fair, the turtles and rollers, they are familiar to many. Ascension is now an important cable centre and has long ceased to be one of His Majesty's ships. 

From Ascension to St. Helena, another delightful spot, and here we met with great hospitality from the Governor, colonel Sterndale, who gave a dance to which all the ladies of the island were invited. I lost my heart to the Governor's niece, and as a token of affection presented her with my scales (sub-lieutenant's epaulettes) with hope in my heart aided by calculations that we should not be in blue uniform again before we got home, and the odds were good that I should not be called upon to appear in them in England. What the lady could have done with them I can't think.

In the castle at St. Helena there lived an old lady, whom I visited, reputed to be a hundred years old, and as a young woman she had talked to Napoleon—a curious link with the past.

From St. Helena across to St. Paul de Loanda and up the coast calling at Fernando Po, Anno Bom and Cape Lopez.

At St. Paul's I had an amusing experience. We were camping out for shooting; the country is fairly open undulating plains, on which grazed in those days many kind of antelope and buck. Being open country it was difficult to get within moderate range. I started to stalk a fine specimen of roan antelope; it was a long stalk and very hot. Eventually he moved into some high grass, in which from time to time I could see his head. For some time I went on, first getting a view, then running fifty yards or so, then peering up for another view, when to my horror I saw moving through the grass and coming towards me at great speed what looked like the rounded back of some huge animal; so huge and moving so fast that as I went quickly through all those that went into the Ark or that I had ever heard of in the Zoo or anywhere else, nothing fitted; I was fairly scared and ready to bolt like a frightened rabbit, when up went a jet of steam. It was an engine, the last thing I had expected to see; it appeared they were prospecting for minerals, and had run a light railway out across the plain. The engines had large round sun hoods, and the top of the hood was just level the top of the grass. Well it was a relief to know what it was; my roan was gone, it was getting late and I had long since lost Tom Peter, my Kroo boy. Kroomen are wonderful in a boat but not much good on foot. The last part of the walk back to camp was not too good; I was followed by what I took to be hyenas, no doubt quite harmless but unpleasant, snuffling along behind when you are alone and not too sure of your bearings.

At Cape Lopez I landed with the captain to shoot grey parrots for the pot. These parrots, fed on bananas and mealies, are very good eating and as they swoop into the water-holes in the evening give difficult and sporting shots; but beware how you go to pick up a wounded bird for if it lays hold of a finger you will remember it. Coming out of a fringe of bush along the coast, into a wide open space, there was grazing fairly close at hand, a bush buck and farther off, perhaps two hundred yards, a solitary buffalo. I had some buckshot and Rolleston suggested I should try for the buck, but neither of us liked the buffalo, armed as we were with shotguns only. I hadn't gone far before friend buffalo winded me; he turned towards where I was lying, with his nose stretched out in that unfriendly way they have, he began pacing towards me, and I was in no doubt at all about retreat—at first a strategic movement to the rear, but as he broke into a trot, I was up and legging it for a sizable tree only there were none to be had. Had there been any one present they might have thought they were witnessing a race between a post captain and a sub-lieutenant. We both stopped because we had no more breath, and finding our friend had satisfied his curiosity, had a good laugh.

The next morning Elder, a lieutenant in the ship, and I and a French ivory hunter went off to try and get an elephant. We went up the river some ten miles in the ship's steamboat, towing a large canoe loaded with carriers of both sexes. Having left the boats and portioned out the loads we started off in single file, through heavy forest, Frenchman and I leading and both unloaded. We hadn't gone far when there was a crash in the bush away to the right and something was apparently coming straight for us. “Gorille, gorille,” shouted my friend and fled up the path, I after him trying to load as I ran. However, it was not a gorilla but a buffalo we had disturbed in his midday siesta. He charged right through the line of porters who dropped their loads and scattered in every direction; it was a long time before we got going again.

We camped that night, and the next two or three, near a native village on the edge of a big lagoon, which was crowded with every sort of waterfowl and especially conspicuous were thousands of pink flamingoes. As they rose off the water at dawn, they made a surprising noise, and were a beautiful sight with the rising sun lighting up their wings.

We trekked all day after elephant and were not far from them but never quite got up with them. The Ogawi River is practically on the Equator, and in what is known as the gorilla belt. Apparently they are only found about a hundred miles each side of the river—apart of course from the Congo district. The natives and our French friend had a great fear of meeting gorilla, and the natives would not on any account go into the forest; the country consisting of belts of very thick forest with high trees meeting overhead so that it was nearly dark and very steamy. Between these belts of forest were open park-like tracts of country on which grazed large herds of buffalo, not the big African buffalo but the smaller and redder kind known locally as bush cow. We worked hard but got no elephant, but shot two or three buffalo—enough to supply the ship with fresh meat.

From Cape Lopez we made our way up the coast calling at Accra, Cape Coast Castle and Takoradi. I landed first at Takoradi in a canoe through the surf, Rolleston in the stern, myself in the bow and a naked savage with a paddle in the middle taking us in. It would have seemed an impossible stretch of imagination to suppose that forty years later I should steam into Takoradi, a harbour complete with breakwater, concrete wharves, sheds, railways, cranes—in fact a modern commercial harbour.

I don't know that we did very much towards its early development, but our navigator, Hughes-Onslow, was ashore some time fixing all the main points and I chained out part of the foreshore.

And so back to Sierra Leone where we spent weary months all through the rains, until a new excitement was suddenly launched. We knew the flagship was somewhere on the coast. One morning she arrived very early. About eight o'clock, the admiral was reported afloat with his flag flying ... panic, we made sure he was coming to us ... tremendous rushing about, guards parading and so forth, but he steamed straight past and on to the *Alecto*, a paddlewheel gunboat lying some two cables on our beam. As he went alongside there was not a sign of life; a fearful hush as we saw the admiral and his staff climb up the gangway received by no one. As the admiral stood on desk a black quartermaster (*Alecto* was almost entirely manned by Kroomen) appeared round the corner of the deckhouse, and seeing the admiral incontinently fled; the next five minutes or so were a fitting subject for a comic artist. The alarm had been given and one by one the Kroo boys appeared from below and climbed stealthily into the two big surf boats stowed on the booms. From our viewpoint we could see a row of black heads—just visible—peeping over the side of the surf boat gazing at the fearful apparition on the quarter deck. Another dreadful pause, you could almost hear a pin drop in the *Phoebe*, all hands from the captain down gazing at the *Alecto*. Then appeared a white officer hastily buttoning up a tunic and trailing a sword behind him. Very few words passed before we saw the august procession reform and beat a dignified retreat to the barge. Later came our own inspection which led to the dumping of some of my best heads and skins usually stowed on the booms, but which were certain the first lieutenant thought, to queer any chance he had of promotion should they catch the admiral's eye. There was a sigh of relief when the flagship sailed that evening, members of the wardroom who had not spoken for months greeted each other like old friends who had somehow survived a common peril.

News came about this time that the *Philomel*, due to relieve us, had left England, and when it was known the captain had received a cable the men almost arranged the date we should arrive in Plymouth Sound. The captain looked gloomy and news was posted up that the ship would leave not for England but for a long list of coast ports ending up at Simonstown to await relief. This order nearly caused a mutiny, the ship had been nearly four years in commission, there had been a lot of sickness and the men
had made up their minds they were homeward bound. Arrived at the Cape we found relations with the Transvaal Government were even more strained, the closing of the drifts had increased the tension. Would there be war? I had a chance of turning over to the *Philomel*; on the other hand things might drift along as they had for a long time. I had had a pretty bad go of dysentery and I went home, and so missed the South African War which broke out six months later.

Once more, our nose really pointed for home this time, we visited St. Helena, Ascension, Sierra Leone, Las Palmas and so to Plymouth. In due course we were inspected by Sir E. Fremantle and paid off.

To my surprise a few days later I saw in the Gazette that I was specially promoted for services on the west coast of Africa. I had a charming letter from my late captain describing my promotion as a compliment to the ship.
