#CHAPTER VIII

####1910: HOME SERVICE AND DESTROYERS

In March 1910 the *King Alfred* duly arrived in Portsmouth and paid off. My future was still in the air; should I get my promotion in June or not? We took rooms in a farmhouse in Liss to spend our leave and to wait and see what happened. At our particular farmhouse papers were not delivered, so on the fatal day I got up good and early and walked down to the station to meet the paper train from London, leaving my wife with instructions that if I was successful to be ready with glad rags and we would go up to town and celebrate, if not I must try and get into a job as soon as possible so as to have a chance next time. However, as I took the paper from the first bundle flung out and quickly found my name in the list all was well and up we went to London town.

As my foreign-service leave drew to an end I went up to the Admiralty to see what they were going to do with me. I was now a full-blown commander, with a very big jump behind me. I was seen by the Second Sea Lord himself. I don't know why Admiral Bridgeman saw me himself; perhaps in those days there was no naval assistant to deal with this kind of business as he would do now. Admiral Bridgeman asked me what I would like to do and I told him my preference for small ships and that I should above anything like to get the command of a destroyer. He talked a good bit about my experience in the *King Alfred* and that he was short of commanders suitable as executive officers for big ships, and I went back prepared to expect that I must go as commander of a battleship or cruiser, and was agreeably surprised to get an appointment in command of the *Bonnetta*, a destroyer in the Fifth Flotilla at Devonport. The Fifth Flotilla was only what was called a nucleus crew flotilla but I knew that if all went well, it meant a move eventually to a running flotilla.

The Fifth Flotilla, based on Devonport, comprised twenty ships of the thirty-knotter class as they were called, with one or two odd designs such as *Arab*, *Express* and *Bonnetta*.

The flotilla was divided into two half flotillas each under a commander, the senior taking command of the whole flotilla at sea. Captain D. was permanently installed in the depot ship. Besides the nucleus-crew flotillas there were the two running flotillas fully manned, the first and second consisting of the newer destroyers of the *Tribal*, *River* and *Cameleon* classes. The “Tribals” were still coal-burning as were all the nucleus flotillas with the exceptions of the *Bonnetta* and her sister ship.

In the nucleus-crew flotillas we did a great deal of seatime, and as besides the captain the only other executive officer was a gunner supplemented at such times as annual manoeuvres by a sub or junior lieutenant, there was plenty to do.

There was no wireless and the signal staff consisted of one signalman in each ship with a leading signalman in the commander's ship. In charge of the engines we had a warrant engineer.

The thirty-knotters varied a good deal in accommodation available but in most of them the captain had a small cabin to himself with enough space outside to put down a rubber bath; the remaining officers had bunks round the wardroom and a small wash-place outside, an improvement on a torpedo boat, where all washing must needs be done on the upper deck. 

There is no doubt that an immense amount of valuable knowledge and experience was collected in the nucleus flotillas, our happy hunting-ground was generally Brodick Bay or Lamlash. Captains and gunners became perforce expert signalmen, all signals being visual and in a large flotilla apart from manoeuvring signals at sea, the administrative work mostly passed through the bridge, the one signalman being hard at it continuously.

One long day picking up torpedoes for the Channel Fleet, Prince Louis of Battenberg then in command, had been particularly strenuous. In the evening the Fleet returned to Lamlash, we followed with the recovered torpedoes on board.

Night fell and each ship was anxious to find the destroyer which had her particular torpedoes. Most of the inquiries were fired at me as senior officer and it was quite impossible to compete. I made a general signal to destroyers to distribute torpedoes and return independently to Brodick Bay to anchor for the night.

Having got rid of my own batch I started off for Brodick with ships all round flashing at me for further information. My leading signalman, who was one of the best I have ever served with, was pretty nearly all in. We had weighed at six that morning, it was now nearly midnight, and he had been at it almost without a break. I told the man to answer no more signals but to go to bed. I was smoking a pipe on deck before turning in, and idly watching a searchlight beam flashing over the hill from Lamlash; I realized they were calling me, and reluctantly gave orders to clear away the searchlight and answer, only to receive orders to weigh immediately with the flotilla and proceed with all despatch to Plymouth.

It was the first hint of the rise in German sea power, and one of many similar days in destroyers before the War. The thirty-knotters, of which I commanded a number, were fast and handy, but wet, and their low bridges built round the foremost 12-pounder gun and protected by canvas on rails, were very vulnerable to the sea and had an unpleasant way of collapsing round the gun support, leaving the occupants of the bridge well awash and clinging on as best they could. One evening we were caught at anchor in Torbay with a rising sou'westerly gale. It was necessary to get out and we lost five bridges and took many hours before getting safely into the sound. A bedraggled lot we looked, when morning came, but they all got in. One ship only, I think, the *Bullfinch*, had broken her back, more or less her forepart from the bridge had drooped. Of course on these sorts of days and nights, of which the Channel provides so liberally for small craft, there were few if any dry spots on board, even the engine-room and boiler-room floor plates were often well awash.

Arrived at Plymouth, I found orders waiting me to join the *Cameleon*, Second Flotilla at Dover, Captain Brand in command. The Agadir incident had just occurred and relations between the Germans and ourselves were strained.

The Second Flotilla were based at Portland and a good deal of fun and rivalry went on in going in and out of the penns, as the wooden piers were called at which we berthed. It was a close fit, some got reputations as good penn workers, others not so good.

More and more attention was being turned to the North Sea and our base was moved before long to Invergordon with the First Flotilla under Sir Robert Arbuthnot at Immingham and Harwich. Later again, Long Hope, Scapa Flow, became our summer quarters with Invergordon in winter.

Life was exceedingly strenuous; six days a week we were out from Monday morning until noon on Saturday with a great many night exercises thrown in. Brand was succeeded by Tyrwhitt and we spent much time at Long Hope, and what became known as the B.E. attacks were formulated and practised—they were afterwards known as the A.U. attacks. They seemed at that time a great advance on the more or less go-as-you-please methods existing, although they did not eventually stand up to the test of war. I had a feeling that something definite might be possible from the use of smoke screens. Smoke, as cover for defence, had of course been employed, but the introduction of oil fuel with the capacity, by merely altering the air supply to the furnaces, of making dense clouds of black smoke at will, had simplified matters. Admiral Jellicoe had first used the capacity of large numbers of destroyers in company to make a continuous smoke screen in the manoeuvres of 1912 in which he had broken off action with a superior enemy. This was of course a purely defensive use, it seemed it might be possible to work out some form of attack under the cover of smoke, thereby dealing with the important problem of “time of flight of the torpedo”.

We had then just got in the Fleet the hot-air torpedo; in fact, in the Second Flotilla we had the first supply. This had increased the range, but it had not materially altered the speed, that is the “time of flight”. If the missile was going to take ten minutes to arrive, the target had that much time to alter course, increase speed, reduce speed, etc., and however cunning the imagination in the firing ship, it was almost pure luck if in ten minutes' time he foretold the then whereabouts of the target. I hoped it might be possible to find some practical means of laying a screen through which a flotilla would emerge at least much closer to the target. Tyrwhitt approved and arranged that I should take my division to Stornaway, there to meet a battle squadron and carry out experimental attacks. The attacks were fairly successful but unfortunately we lost, during an attack, one of the precious new torpedoes and everything had to give way to finding it.

These experiments were carried out fairly close inshore between the Island of Skye and the mainland, and the day we arrived a German, almost certainly a naval officer, arrived at the hotel in Stornaway. The manager of the hotel took the trouble to come and give me this information which I duly reported, and I also asked my informant to let me know what he, the German, was doing there and how he amused himself. It appeared that he had no known business in the island, and that he passed the day on the cliffs with a pair of field-glasses. Suspicion of all Germans was strong in the north in 1912 and 1913. Whether the man was gathering information or not I never heard, probably the authorities knew all about him; beyond the fact we were laying smoke screens he could not have gathered much.

A little later I had another experience with a spy, this apparently a genuine one. We were sent to Leith to experiment as to the possibility of lifting a turbine with our own resources; we berthed in the fish dock at Leith where there was calm water and no lifting appliances. One day while the experiment was going on a local fish master came on board and said: “You see that chap over there; he's a German and always hangs about here if there is anything unusual going on; moreover he gets hold of your chaps in the evening and stands them drinks.” I passed the word round that if any stranger wanted to stand drinks to let him have some good fairy tales in exchange, but I also got in touch with the Chief Constable in Edinburgh for inquiry. In due course a plain-clothes inspector came to see me and said they had been in touch with Scotland Yard, they knew all about my friend and rather liked him as they got a lot of information from the stuff he sent to Germany. I often wondered if this gentleman was among those so quickly rounded up a year later.

After another spell at Invergordon the *Cameleon* was ordered to Plymouth to refit. On the way we ran into a sou'westerly gale with a very steep sea off Start Point, and although I had eased down, we got out of step with disastrous results to myself. A big sea broke over the bridge and brought an iron stanchion down across my head. Such was the force of the blow that in falling my head also struck the brass handle of the engine-room telegraph and snapped that off. I had a compound fracture of the skull and was of course unconscious. Oliver, the first lieutenant, and Harold Brown, my engineer officer, and afterwards to become Engineer in Chief of the Navy, took charge of me and with great good will endeavoured to shave my head, which was in rather a mess, but luckily as the doctor told me afterwards, gave it up owing to the violent motion of the ship making the right manipulation of a razor too difficult. A curious condition of the subconscious occurred; I knew nothing, not even to this day, of what hit me but was told afterwards how I behaved. It appears that on the bridge they didn't think I was worth much more than the funeral expenses, but when the ship got into the Sound some hours later they were having a pow-wow as to how to get me off the bridge, and into the ambulance boat alongside; subconsciously, I suppose, I took in the problem, got up, walked down the ladder and into the boat; moreover I told the first lieutenant the keys of the safe were in a certain drawer in my cabin, and not to worry to tell my wife, it would do in the morning.

I was lucky to find in the hospital, Dalton, a very expert surgeon who no doubt saved my life. I remember he was particularly pleased about my nose which had also got broken, as he said he had never seen me before in his life and wasn't quite sure how I wore it and had made a really good shot. When I came to, the next day or the day after, my wife was sitting beside me; she had had the worst time of it. She had been up in Invergordon with me and returning to Plymouth by train had arrived some time late in the evening. About midnight, Arthur Cay, at that time flag captain, came to the house to say I was in the hospital and not worth much and she had better come along. We had at that time an old Devonshire cook who had been with us for some years, and when Cay came to the door she, the cook, went down, opening the door carefully, on the chain, my wife now standing on the stairs overheard the following conversation: “Can I see Mrs. Tweedie, please?” “Nobody see's the missus at this time of night when the master's away;” and then my wife intervened. The next day the servants were sitting waiting for the telephone as my wife had promised to ring up. Curiously enough as they were waiting a picture fell down off the wall. “Ah,” said the cook, “now the master has passed away.” But he hadn't, and in due course, the Admiralty having most generously compensated me for my broken head, we paid our bills and went off to Switzerland for a month's sick leave. We went carefully to Vevey under the doctor's instructions that I was to be very quiet. It was quiet, raining all day, but on the third we flitted up above the snowline and completed the cure on bobsleighs and skis.

This episode lost me the *Cameleon*, but I returned to the Second Flotilla in command of the *Hope*. My luck was out in the *Hope*; she had a reputation as an unlucky ship, and as far as I was concerned she lived up to it. She was christened by the sailors the “No Hope” or the “Hopeless” and carried her reputation into the War by disappearing early on, supposed to have struck a mine.

Having been duly surveyed and passed fit, I joined at Plymouth and sailed next day straight into a bumpy sea. Unfortunately the oil-tank cover just outside my cabin was defective, and when eventually I got down my cabin was more or less awash with oil fuel and for days and weeks everything smelt of oil fuel, even the food tasted of the same wholesome but unpleasant ingredient.

Arrived at Cromarty we went alongside an oiler to fuel. The hose was led down to a tank below the fore mess deck and for some reason at the first heave of the pump, there was an explosion and the mess deck was on fire. Several were badly burned and as I ran forward I met one poor chap with his clothes blazing; in agony he jumped overboard and although quickly pulled out he was too badly burned to recover. The mess deck was black with Smoke. I was told a chief stoker called Sullivan had already got one or two men out and had gone in again. Groping through the smoke I came across Sullivan who said he was all right and could not find any one else, so we set to work to pull down the contents of the hat racks overhead which were burning. The fire was soon extinguished and although several had to be discharged to hospital for treatment they all recovered except the man already referred to. One of the worst sufferers was Sullivan himself who had got his stomach and lungs full of fumes. This man had behaved with great gallantry at heavy risk to himself, he had saved the lives of certainly two men, and had by his prompt action in closing the oil-fuel stop-valve immediately, probably saved a very serious fire. C.P.O. Sullivan was awarded the Albert Medal.

Later in the year we were weatherbound for some days in Long Hope. Tyrwhitt made a signal that he proposed going round to Kirkwall in order to get some shelter from the persistent bad weather. We weighed and got it as usual in the Pentland Firth but all went well until we rounded up to approach Kirkwall. The wind was dead astern with a big sea running; the first lieutenant, Addison, was in the wardroom, the engineer officer in the engine-room, and the sub was on the bridge with me. I remarked to the latter: “You have often read about a ship being pooped, now you will see one,” for there was a specially big sea standing up over the stern which I could see was going to come on board. I wasn't at all worried as I knew everything was battened down and well lashed. Most unfortunately it seems that Lieutenant Addison, feeling perhaps the motion had eased a little, had opened the wardroom hatch and come on deck, unseen from the bridge, while as luck would have it Pendleton, the engineer lieutenant, had done the same thing and come up from the engine-room. Addison was swept overboard and we never saw him again, nor was his body ever recovered. Pendleton nearly shared the same fate and was fearfully injured, but I am thankful to say eventually recovered in Kirkwall Hospital. It was a sad arrival in harbour, we all felt the loss, I especially, for Addison was a charming messmate and a most capable first lieutenant. That was the last unpleasantness I had in the *Hope*, but it was now late in 1913, I had been over three years promoted and all the time in destroyers. There was a sort of unwritten law that a commander could not make a really satisfactory captain unless he had served some time as second in command of a big ship. I took council with Tyrwhitt and he agreed that I ought not to postpone this vital experience any longer. As the *Hope* was due to pay off I applied for a War course, held then at Portsmouth in the same building now used for the tactical courses. It was an interesting course and we had lectures on all sorts of subjects. One of the lecturers was Sir Henry Wilson at that time head of the Staff College at Camberley. The title of his lecture was the “Frontiers of Europe”, his definition of a frontier being “an imaginary line which you could take up and put down anywhere you liked, provided you were strong enough”.

He talked naturally a good deal about Germany, and how she was bent on war and he ended his lecture with these rather startling words: “Gentlemen you can take it from me that Germany will be at war with this country within a year.” This statement made a considerable impression on me, and I remember remarking to my wife that presumably the Government knew everything that Sir Henry knew and if it was true surely the country would have been warned; anything less prepared for war than England in 1913 could hardly be imagined. While still doing the course I had a letter from H. D. R. Watson to say he was about to commission the *Essex*, would I come as commander? The *Essex* was to be an experimental ship manned by boys, but we were to do all the routine work of the station, the same as any other ship. It was, in fact, an experiment to find a solution to what remains a problem to this day; how to fill the gap between the time a boy leaves the training ship all keyed up and full of enthusiasm, and the time when he can find his feet as a really useful member of the ship's company. We were to take the boys away for two years, and bring them back as able Seamen, acting seamen gunners, etc., ready to go to the different technical schools.

I didn't like the idea a bit. In the first case I had made up my mind if I must go to a big ship, I wanted her to be a really big ship and an up-to-date ship. I had hopes even of the *Queen Elizabeth*—just launched. The *Essex* was to my mind an obsolete ship, and I perhaps half believed Sir Henry Wilson might be right. I did not want to be in the West Indies in a semi-training ship if there was going to be war. Watson then wrote that the scheme was a pet of Sir John Jellicoe and that he, Sir John, wanted me to go. There was no more to be said.
