# CHAPTER I

#### THE STORY OF A NAVAL LIFE

Some few years ago there appeared an article in *The Times* headed "The Extinct Tweedie Family". The family are not extinct; in almost every Dominion of the Empire I have met or heard of families bearing the name and tracing descent from the same family who for so many generations dwelt on the banks of the Tweed. The first authentic mention of the family dates 1115, but legend goes back much further and legend gives the story of the Spirit of the Tweed, becoming enamoured of a fair lady walking by Tweed Pool. A son was born and appears first as John of the Tweed, then Tueda and so Tweedie.

The name appears constantly in all Border history - in 1351 we find Tweedie of Drummelzier married the fourth daughter of Sir James Douglas and Lady Agnes Douglas. This Lady Agnes was the celebrated Black Agnes of whom Sir Walter Scott writes: 

> *She kept a stir in tower and trench*  
> *That brawling, boisterous Scottish wench.*

From 1388 there is a gap of nearly a generation in the family records, it was the year of Otterbourne that famous and historic fight between the Douglasses and the Tweedies on the one side, and the Percys on the other, following a raid by the Scots into Northumbria. A recent discovery has disclosed over a thousand skulls all lying together near the scene of the encounter and this no doubt accounted for most of the family of an age to bear arms.

The next hundred years and more are full of records of family feuds of the deadliest sort and we read that on 18th November 1458 Sir William Cockburn and his two brothers slew Roger Tweedie and Walter his brother in the streets of Edinburgh, for which the Cockburns were ordered to “satisfy” the Tweedies with whom, and the Veitchs, they had at this time a “deidly feid”; one cannot help liking the word “satisfy” used in this record and wonder what form the satisfaction took. But feuds with all the surrounding families appeared to be constant and the family of Nasmith comes much into the picture; it seems a Nasmith last slew a Tweedie and was ordered by the Provost of Peebles to pay three hundred sheep, presumably by way of recompense There is no record of these sheep having been delivered, so finding myself occupying the next room at the Admiralty to Captain Nasmith, I asked him for my sheep or as I was not particularly interested now in mutton I offered to accept payment in almost anything, but nothing came of it.

In spite of the feuds and constant “cruel slauchteris” the Tweedies owned much land and in 1536 James Tweedie of Drummelzier married “Marjorie”, sister of the Queen of Scotland, and King James V invited himself to the marriage, Tweedie being described as “the Laird of Drummelzier, chief of the Tweedies, as imminent a baron, and as of great command as any in Tweeddale”. The lands of Rachan, Oliver, Quarter, Drummelzier, Dreva and other properties all remained in the family until well into my own lifetime, when like so many other families who lived on the land, and by the land they had to give way to others enjoying more lucrative ways of making a livelihood.

Nothing remains now to the Tweedies except the ruins of the old castles, still to be seen, and the ancient family motto “Thole and think on”.

My grandfather was the son of Tweedie of Rachan and served during the Peninsular Wars in the Royal Artillery, afterwards living for many years at Rolvenden in Kent, and how he came to get to Kent from Scotland seems worth recalling.

A certain Mr. Forbes of Watertown in Aberdeenshire having a delicate wife came south to escape the rigours of a Scottish climate and bought the estate of Rawlinson in the parish of Rolvenden.

My grandfather returning after the Battle of Waterloo was landed with his battery at the then Port of Rye to march to Woolwich; on the way he fell sick and was left at the village inn. Mr. Forbes hearing there was an officer left behind in the inn, had him brought up to the house for better comfort and nursing. The upshot of the matter was, that the young officer recovering, in due course, married the only daughter of the house, thus uniting two Scottish families by a chance meeting in Kent.

My father followed in his father's footsteps and saw much service in the Crimea, Indian Mutiny, and the Red River Campaign in Canada.

It always seems interesting to me to remember that my own father with his battery marched from Alexandria to Suez *en route* to India because the Suez Canal was not then in existence. Eventually like all gunners he came to Woolwich, met my mother at a Woolwich ball, and at Woolwich I was eventually born.

In 1879 my father was sent to Halifax, Nova Scotia, and we made the voyage in the *Scotia*, a square-rigged paddle-steamer; she must have been one of the last paddle-steamers to ply the Atlantic.

After another spell at Woolwich where my father commanded the Field Artillery, he retired and we went to live at Wisborough Green in Sussex.

While still at Woolwich I had thoughts of going to sea, the desire being tempered by the knowledge that I should not be able to ride if I did, for at Woolwich we were always riding, often in the school with the rough riders, on route marches, and local field days. I used often to accompany my father and ride behind the mounted band. Moreover, living on the common as we did we saw all the parades and the gallop past of the batteries when the old Duke of Cambridge made his annual inspection which was something to fire the desires of any boy.

However, in due course I departed to join Mr. Eastman's academy for young gentlemen aspiring to become naval officers. Tom Eastman and his brother Harry ran the school. Tom had a quick and rather savage temper and any poor wight whose mental senses were not up to standard, soon felt the weight of his good right arm. I think he really frightened all of us, and I truly believe frightened me into the navy; to contemplate the horror of failing when you had been sent up to pass, was quite impossible.

At that time entrance to the navy was by nomination, and then strictly competitive. Lord Winterton, the father of the present peer, a friend of my father's and a neighbour at Shillinglee, got me my nomination, and I sat for the examination held at Portsmouth, in those days in some building close to the Naval Club, about where the Victoria Barracks are now. Each morning we set out in a pair-horse brake from Stubbington to drive in, and each evening drove out. The exam lasted a week and was a pretty good doing for thirteen-year-olds. It happened to be intensely cold, and I remember to this day exercises we were urged to take all the long drive, in order that our fingers should not be stiff for writing when we arrived.

Having sat for the exam I had a pleasant time at Wisborough waiting for the result, tempered by visions of the wrath to come if I had failed; however, one evening a horseman arrived with a telegram - unusual in our house - and the glad news quickly spread that I had passed. This telegram was followed by several more all from outfitters, the gathering of the various firms within the net of Mr. Gieve had not then been accomplished. As seven and six was, I believe, the charge for man and horse to deliver a telegram, my father no doubt could have been satisfied with the information once only.

In due course, at five o'clock in the morning, I dressed in all my new brass buttons to drive to the station and join H.M.S. *Britannia*. What I was going to, and what sort of life the navy was going to be, I hadn't the foggiest idea. I should imagine no boy could have joined with much less knowledge of what was to be the future. However, as we made the long journey from mid-Sussex to Dartmouth, other boys similarly and resplendently dressed, accompanied often by father and mother, joined the train and we were a goodly muster by the time we arrived at Kingswear. Very dark and very wet it was and we were marched down to a waiting steamboat to cross the river. Here we mustered at the cadets' sick quarters, a small house on Ridge Hill hired by the Admiralty, much too small for all of us and we waited in a queue outside in the lane. Why we didn't all join with pneumonia, I don't quite know, when it is remembered mackintoshes and greatcoats were not then designed for naval cadets, our only extra protection from weather being a black-and-white scarf.

One by one we went into the house, exposed our tummies to the doctor for the detection of spots, put out our tongues and passed along armed with a permit to go on board, which was done by the help of one or other of the famous old watermen, Johnny Farr, Old Bob, Russel, and more, whose features remain perfectly familiar, but whose names I forget; these pensioner petty officers were good friends to the newcomers, and gave the tip for many a pitfall ahead for the unwary.

Having paid my fare, one halfpenny, I stepped on board and mixed with the remainder of my term. We were fiftyeight strong. Pound, now C-in-C. of the Mediterranean Fleet - the only survivor of the term still on the active list - passed in first, I was about half-way down.

The administration of the *Britannia* in 1890 had, there is no doubt, got to a low ebb; the ship was virtually run by an official called the “Cadet Sergeant-Major” - called by the cadets “Skajjer” - assisted by a force of ship's police. The captain and commander we seldom saw, the two lieutenants who kept day on and day off were reputed to relieve each other at Paddington Station, this is probably a great libel but actually except as defaulters we saw very little of them. The Term lieutenant came in of course some years later. Besides the officers there were a body of instructors, some of whom blossomed out into uniform about that time, but all these arrived by boat at nine o'clock in the morning and scuttled back into the boat again as soon as afternoon classes were over, so that they did not come at all into our everyday lives.

A good deal has been written about the bullying at that time in the *Britannia* and I think one can say truthfully that it had got to being more than a joke. Boys left alone are often brutes to those slightly younger or less experienced than themselves and the smaller boys are far more in awe of a boy a year or so older, or a term or two senior, than of all the senior officers in the world.

Fagging had got to a fine art. The first thing in the morning before landing for drill, each cadet had a handful of ship's biscuits and a bowl of cocoa, and it was no uncommon thing to be fagged by a senior term boy for your biscuit before you even got a bite. Fagging for money was not unknown, to give up a carefully hoarded shilling against the promise to pay back when the holiday journey money was given out, was not satisfying.

Nowadays there is, of course, a first-class canteen on the playing fields to satisfy the wants of cadets. There was no
canteen up at the field then, but a hut in the corner known as “Stodgers”. “Stodger” - I don't know that I ever heard
his real name - and his two daughters Flora and Annie used to run it, and busy enough they were, at least at the beginning of the term when pocket money was in plenty, trying to serve two hundred cadets over a ten-foot counter.

Stodge, that is eatables, were not allowed to be brought on board the ship, which of course meant a great opening for smuggling.

Cadets were hungry in the evening, and good prices, double and more, were paid for anything brought on board. It was known as ship's price. Every cadet was searched and the penalty for chocolate if found rammed into the socks or even more privy garments was severe. Most of the smugglers, that is the regular smugglers, were well known, and the word quickly went round the sleeping decks if any one had stodge to sell.

This opened another door for fagging; news, as the first term were called, were fagged to bring off stodge for senior cadets; perhaps they got paid for what they had to spend, but if they were caught they stood the rub and as I said the penalties were heavy.

The climax of the bullying came when the chief gang installed a penny toll for going into the playing fields; this gang was well known to all of us juniors; I won't repeat even their nicknames; they all eventually got turned out and no doubt became in due course excellent citizens.

Perhaps there was no great cruelty inflicted, but a constant fear of what might be, which made life somewhat of a misery. We all went in fear of the gang and I think as a “new” you would go miles round a corner sooner than pass one of them face to face. You were fairly certain to be made to do some absurd or impossible task and there was no redress, any backchat from a junior to a senior term meant facing the whole term, the conventions were rigid and for a small boy to oppose a convention even if there was any chance of success is I think almost unknown.

One week-end, however, towards the end of the first term a boy's parents came down to see him, whether in answer to an S.O.S. or not I never heard; however, he went ashore with them and positively refused to come off. Investigation followed and there was a father and mother of a row, there is no doubt he gave the whole thing away, somehow it got into the newspapers and *The Times* had leading columns on the subject of bullying in the *Britannia*, while a picturepaper came out illustrating the wooden horse on which we were strapped when we were to be legitimately beaten and which had nothing at all to do with the bullying.

Before long the morning came, when all the cadets were piped to muster on the poop, a long oration was given by the captain, which I fear has left no impression, but at the end of it seven names were read and seven culprits stood out in front and were marched down to a waiting boat and passed out of naval life. My term mate did a brave thing for a small boy to do; he never came back but served, and maybe he's still serving, in H.M. Army. We reaped the reward, and life seemed comparatively easy after the climax.

So much for the bullying side, which, thank goodness, passed after a few months. It is worth recalling what seemed to me bad then, and seems more so now; the almost inhuman punishment system for very trivial offences; the reward was usually a day's three - punishments were numbered from one to seven. A day's three for a small boy never used to hard labour was a most killing affair. Armed with a pair of Indian clubs you ran round a space, which is now covered by the workshops at Dartmouth, for one solid hour with a short interval in the middle and occasional breaks into quick step. I can only imagine that neither the officer who gave the punishment nor the drill-sergeant who carried it out had any conception of what they were inflicting. I have run round that drill-yard until I thought my head and lungs would burst, and more than once I saw cadets just collapse with sheer inability to go any more.

Of course the effect was not always the same; old offenders got hardened, and certain boys were always chosen by the sergeant as leaders, they set a hard pace and I fear rather gloried in knocking other boys out. It was an iniquitous system. Most of our time, other than in the classrooms, was spent in learning sail drills, the lead of rigging, how to set up standing rigging, strike a topmast and all the rest of it, on the same lines as had, I suppose, been taught for a hundred years. There was little sign of a modern navy in sight from the seamanship-room of the *Britannia*. For practical instruction we had *The Wave* - a top-heavy looking yacht, barque-rigged. I thoroughly enjoyed going out in her although she did roll heavily. Besides *The Wave*, there were the *Syren* and *Arrow* schooners, and a number of sailing cutters available for the cadets, which were great fun and certainly taught us how to handle sailing craft.

Much of the life in the *Britannia* would no doubt be considered hard, judged by modern school standards. I remember it was very cold, the wind seemed to whistle always through the sleeping decks. We slept in hammocks slung to the beams in rows, and a slippery hitch ın your head and foot lashings was always worth looking for before turning in. Under our hammocks, stood the sea-chests - which contained all our clothes - fine great wooden boxes well strapped with iron. Mine is still going strong in the harness room at home.

In the top of the chest, when you opened the lid, was fitted a looking-glass, and in front a tin basin to wash in; on one side of the basin a clothes-till, and on the other side a small private till which was always supposed to be locked and held all that a cadet possessed of a private nature.

A feature of the sleeping decks was that at the fore end there were large open salt-water baths and at six-thirty, at the sound of the turn-out bugle, the decks would resound in heavy thuds as sleepy boys flung themselves out of their hammocks and raced along the decks to plunge into what seemed the coldest water in the world.

Every one had to go through, and ablutions on that scale do not take long. Once a week we went through this same bath at night, only this time heated; you could swim, and to remain underwater hidden when the bath was cleared was a constant temptation and usually meant discovery and punishment. Looking through the records of my crimes in the Britannia, many years after, I came to the conclusion that the bath, with the French master a good second, were my chief troubles.

Of Dartmouth, the River Dart, and the surrounding country, much has been written and it remains little changed. Dartmouth has grown, the college and hospital have sprung up, even Dittisham has grown, and horrid little houses have been planted on the road to and round about Stoke Fleming, but much of the country is unchanged. As a whip to the beagles I got to know it well and of the lighter side of *Britannia* life, the beagles in winter, the river in summer, with rugby and cricket sandwiched in, left little of our spare time spare.
