#CHAPTER X

####WAR

On July 30th we left Quebec, with general regret, to return to Mexican waters. We put into Halifax to coal, spending a day or two there before leaving for Bermuda. Still no one in the ship had any serious feelings that we were likely to be involved in a European war and that within a few days. We knew now that Germany and Russia were committed, but there still seemed no reason why we should be drawn in.

On August 3rd, while on our way to Bermuda, the receipt of the Warning Telegram, came as a distinct shock.

Next day, there was no doubt; a wireless message was received to the effect that unless we heard to the contrary a state of war would exist between England and Germany at eight o'clock (our time) that same evening.

Shell had already been fused and there was little more to be done. Eight o'clock came and as president of the mess, I proposed the King's health, and turning to the waiting bugler told him to sound off “Night action stations”.

So Sir Henry Wilson's statement had come true, only it still wanted four months to complete the year he had given it. I was caught out, as I had half feared, on a distant station, in a more or less obsolete ship, manned with boys. However good the latter might be, one realized they were trained gunners. In fact the commission so far had provided meagre opportunity even for elementary gunnery, and that was in fact all that we had ever set out to accomplish.

War made a difference, but not very apparent immediately. As far as we knew, there was no enemy ship in North Atlantic waters. The *Karlsruhr* and *Dresden* were well away to the south and both too fast for us to catch.

Full speed to Bermuda to fill up with coal, embark torpedo heads and spare ammunition, and back to the New York patrol, a line between Sandy Hook and the Ambrose lightships.

For the first three or four days we encountered nothing but fog — an almost impenetrable fog. A fog which meant the escape of many German ships, enabling them to make New York, and get safely interned, at least for the time being.

The position was exasperating, you could often hear the thrash of the propellers of a great ship passing, but it was impossible to make contact, it was impossible to see your own jackstaff. The captain got so annoyed, he determined to go straight for the sound of the next ship passing; we did and cut across the stern of the Bermuda mail, missing her by feet.

That episode made us feel more helpless than ever. To ram a British ship was not going to help, to ask by wireless or siren was only to scare the quarry.

In the meantime curious signals had been flying about in the air, all in correct British cipher. One was apparently from the *Lusitania* who was being chased by a German cruiser, steaming south and calling for help. A second was to the effect that a German cruiser was engaged cutting the cables somewhere off St. John's, Newfoundland. *Essex* was to proceed with all despatch. This last did deceive us, and we were on our way before the Admiralty chipped in with the information that the particular cipher in use was compromised. It appeared the ciphers from the naval attachés' room in Washington had been stolen immediately on the outbreak of war. However, it was not our ingenious friend who tried so hard to lead us away from the vicinity of New York, but the fog, a providential fog for the enemy, which made us well-nigh useless.

Between spells on the patrol line we had to go either to Bermuda to coal, or to Halifax. The captain and I divided the night on the bridge, and steaming south to Bermuda on one occasion I happened to be on the bridge as dawn was breaking. A strange ship was sighted away on the eastern horizon, steaming south on a more or less parallel course. I gave the necessary orders to close this ship. She altered course away from us, and we had to go on full speed, hoisting the signal to “Stop immediately.” I confess to some surprise when the stranger hoisted German colours. These colours had not been sighted since war was declared and all the enemy ships known to be in the Atlantic were accounted for. It seemed there must be some trap and having got her stopped we approached carefully.

She turned out to be the *Bethamia*, and had been in company with the *Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse* when that ship was engaged by the *Highflyer* off the west coast of Africa. Having escaped, the *Bethania* went right away up north into the Arctic regions, where she had been for some time, until she was pressed for food and water. She had on board some two hundred reservists, a quantity of wireless equipment, motor transport and general war stores intended for German South-West Africa; she had also some three thousand tons of Welsh coal, altogether a valuable prize.

The problem was what to do with her, she might or might not be in touch with the *Karlsruhr*, if the latter turned up we should want all hands to fight the ship, it was not expedient therefore to spare a strong prize crew.

The first idea was to get all the naval ratings out of the ship, leaving a skeleton crew on board to navigate her, with orders to keep close to us. It was now about eight o'clock and we ferried them all over, resuming our voyage to Jamaica where the coal was most wanted and the prisoners could be best dealt with. The officers were grouped on the quarter deck and the men in the port waist. The cross-deck apertures were wired up and sentries posted. A machine-gun was posted on the break of the fo'c'sle and another on the after-bridge deck.

 All the same the prisoners were numerically equal to our deck party and the latter were boys. We had four days and nights at sea before us, and a determined rising of prisoners might be awkward, while any hesitation on the part of the boy sentries to shoot might be disastrous.

After due consideration of all the points, another plan was adopted, the ships were again stopped, and the men retransferred to the *Bethania*, the officers being kept on board the *Essex*. The *Bethania* was then taken in tow, with a single six-inch wire and two shackles of her cable paid out. The other end was put on a slip on the quarter deck; any signs of the enemy, the prize could be slipped and would be anchored for some time by the weight of the cable and wire.

Moreover, to keep the prisoners' minds off other things, the captain gave out the *Karlsruhr* would possibly be met with, and in that case it would be necessary to sink the *Bethania*, they should therefore get busy and make as many rafts as was possible. I inspected these rafts when we arrived at Port Royal, they were excellent. The only trouble remaining was the officers. About a dozen strong, I endeavoured to get them to give their parole, but they were not unanimous so had to be kept under close guard.

Great excitement was prevalent among the coloured folk at Jamaica when we arrived. A small guard was sent down to take over the prisoners, but had to be sent back to get something capable of dealing with the excited crowds. Leaving Jamaica again we went to St. Lucia to take over more German prisoners, and then to Nassau, where the Governor was quite certain there was an enemy wireless station established in a nearby, uninhabited island. We searched the island without success, but the rumours still persisted, so one morning at daylight we landed every available man. They spread out in single line abreast, and walked right across from end to end — much torn clothing, a mild case of sunstroke but no wireless station. We hoped the German wireless-station bogie was now laid for ever. Actually, as most of the British ships had at that time German or German-American wireless operators on board, and the islands were full of German residents, it was some months before adequate steps were taken to round up all sources of enemy information in the islands, and in the meantime the *Karlsruhr* was kept well informed of our whereabouts. Once we thought from information received we really had a chance of running into her.

The information was to the effect that *Karlsruhr* was to meet a supply ship at a certain time and in a certain latitude and longitude. During the night we heard strong Telefunken; just before daybreak we were at the rendezvous, and as dawn broke there was a ship, apparently stopped, but no signs of the *Karlsruhr*. The stranger hoisted Danish colours, she was bound for New York, her papers were in order and her cargo consigned to British and American owners, she had no wireless on board; she was released but I still think she fooled us.

Returned to St. Lucia I had a cable from my wife asking for news of Willoughby. The latter was in the *Monmouth*, and why I should be asked about some one in the *Monmouth* was not very obvious. Presumably, belonging to the same squadron, my wife thought we would be in company. Actually we knew nothing of the *Good Hope* or the *Monmouth*, and it was not until a day or two later we learnt through the American wireless that there had been an action in the Pacific. This news was quickly followed by orders for us to proceed to Colon at the entrance of the Panama Canal, in case Von Spee and his squadron should come through, also telling us that the *Good Hope* and *Monmouth* had been sunk and that the *Canopus* and *Glasgow* were in the Pacific.

In the ship it was treated as a joke that the poor old *Essex* suffering from a bad attack of condenseritis, so that our extreme speed was about sixteen knots, should be sent to stop a squadron which had apparently had no difficulty in dealing with two ships, each of them more efficient than we were. It seemed that should they come that way we should be somewhat easy prey. Curiously enough the prospect seemed to raise every one's spirits, and while we lay off the entrance of the canal, what was called the V.C. party was formed every evening, the idea being that at the first news of the enemy arriving at the Pacific end of the canal, this V.C. party was to go in after dark, in the picket boat armed with torpedoes, and endeavour to get a shot as they emerged from the canal. It might have come off, if the American patrol boats were not too inquisitive, and a lot of other ifs. At least it was a chance, there was no other, we were bound to be a target for a certain time, until we were overtaken, which would not take very long. While laying off Colon we had of course to lay outside the three-mile limit, always in a heavy swell. A collier was sent, and we had an exciting day coaling; the collier got the worst of it and was a very battered ship when she left, also taking with her all remaining woodwork or inflammable stores and fittings which could possibly be spared. At the end of a fortnight, we one day received orders to retire on Jamaica at full speed. Full speed was a joke which appealed to every one, but evidently some one had woken up to the fact that the position of the *Essex* was hardly useful, and might quickly become tragic should the Germans elect to come that way. We retired on Jamaica at our full sixteen knots, and on to Bermuda where we rather hoped to get our sorely tried engines put to rights. We were, however, ordered to return at once to the New York patrol.

It was now December; there was hard weather up north and the problem of clothes was acute; we had been mostly in the tropics or in summer weather. Stocks of winter clothing were low, what blue clothing the boys had they had also grown out of; coaling in Bermuda or in the tropics is one thing (it can be done in birthday suits), with the thermometer well below zero is another matter. The ladies of Bermuda came to the rescue, and in an incredibly short time, turned out stacks of flannel shirts, sweaters, socks and all sorts of garments. We also received a welcome consignment from ladies in England, and a further supply in the shape of Christmas presents from the ladies of Quebec, so that after all we left well equipped, and we wanted it.

Arrived again off the Ambrose we had a busy week; there was an immense trade in copper and other war contraband, carried in neutral bottoms, and consigned mostly to Italian ports or to Scandinavian countries. In one American ship the mate confided to me that it was their second trip to Genoa with copper, and that last time they had unloaded directly into railway trucks all labelled Berlin. However, Italy was still neutral, America was neutral; we had to walk warily; relations with America were not too cordial over this very business of visit and search. This boarding work off New York was a really hard test for the boats’ crews. It was intensely cold. Sometimes two or three ships were sighted nearly simultaneously and boats were left many miles away; the men were stiff with cold when picked up; boats' falls got frozen and hoisting and lowering the cutters was difficult.

Coaling in Halifax was, on occasions, very cold with the thermometer many degrees below zero. It was all right for the shovellers and barrow men but for those that had to hang on to the wires hoisting in, it was dangerous and they had to be constantly changed. It was while coaling at Halifax that H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught elected to come and dine. The ship was filthy, the dinner well seasoned with coal-dust, but the Duke was in great spirits. We were always glad to see him on board and I think he had a real affection for the *Essex*. At daylight off again. There were rumours, possibly put about by enemy sources, that the German battle-cruiser *Von Der Tann* was out in the Atlantic and was due in our neighbourhood. She was supposed to be trying to intercept the first of the Canadian troop convoys, now due to sail; if she intercepted us we should get short shrift. We were sent down off Philadelphia, and dropped into as bad a blow as any one wants. It blew from the north and east with snow and a very heavy sea; the thermometer eleven below zero so that the spray froze as it fell; everywhere long icicles. The sea was so steep she was taking it over both ends, no sooner had she taken a big one over the fo'c'sle than she dipped her stern under, and as she picked it up sent the water rushing forward. Everything was battened down but these ships had a dangerous well deck and she was taking in the sea quicker than it could free itself through the scuppers, so in the early hours of the morning I got a gang of shipwrights, with crowbars, and cut a gap in the hammocks' netting, which freed the water to a large extent. It was not easy in the cold and wet, besides continually having to jump for it as a big one came along, but all good things come to an end. I confess to being glad when at last I could get my cabin baled out and a fire lit.

All this time I had, with my captain's permission and good wishes, been trying to get back to destroyers, or at least more near the war, so that on January 2nd when a wireless message came that I was to be sent home forthwith, I was not entirely surprised; I thought and hoped I was off to join Tyrwhitt as I had heard from him that he had asked for me for one of the new destroyers.

We met the *Niobe* on her way in to coal in Halifax and I was transferred to her, to join the *Franconia* for passage to Liverpool. I reported to Admiral Hornby in Halifax. He asked me what I was going home for, for he said “I thought you might have been promoted, but they would have told me.” Arrived in London I was greeted by the waiter at the club with “Congratulate you, sir.” Asking why particularly, he said my name had appeared in the promotion list. So it was true, I was a post captain at the age of thirty-seven, something that in my wildest dreams I should never have expected. I was told to go on leave — I should be wanted soon — down to Plymouth where we still occupied Wellesley House, which we had taken when I was first appointed to destroyers after returning from China, but of which I had not seen much.

After a few days a telegram came directing me to take command of the *Active*. I walked down to the dockyard to find out where that ship was; found she was not only in Devonport but due to sail that night. Her captain was a little upset as he had no news; I had only the telegram in my pocket. I suggested we should go to the C-in-C., explain the position and let him decide which of us should take the ship to sea. The C-in-C. decided I was to go. Back again to the ship to take over, home to get some clothes and say good-bye. At nine o'clock we sailed for Scapa Flow. Submarines had appeared in the Channel and Irish Sea, one was reported outside Plymouth. My orders were to go full speed till clear of the Channel and then steer a course right round Ireland, I was not to pass through the Irish Sea. So the submarine had already established a funk. On the face of it one might have expected to be told that there were submarines reported in the Channel and Irish Sea so try and find them and sink them on your way, for the *Active* was, although labelled a light-cruiser, really little bigger than a destroyer and entirely suitable to deal with submarines. However, those were the orders and away we went bang into a sou'westerly gale and somewhere off Queenstown we were brought-to in a very heavy sea. I asked permission to proceed through the Irish Sea but got no response, so after pounding into it for a day and a night, doing considerable damage to deck fittings and eventually chucking the rangefinder off the bridge and clean over the side, I turned tail and ran into Bantry to give the sea a chance of moderating. We stayed in Bantry about twelve hours, then tried again. It was still very steep, and we were glad to turn north and get it behind us. Off Cape Wrath we passed the *Clan Macnaughton*, Commander Jeffreys, who I knew well and we exchanged signals; she was standing south and making very heavy weather of it. I don't know if we were the last ship to speak to her, but she disappeared and was supposed to have capsized.

Our entrance into Scapa was not a very happy one. The necessary signals had been exchanged and we were told to enter. I was familiar enough with the entrance, but no one had told us that a net defence had been put right across, except for the channel between Flotta and the Calf of Flotta. We came in with a very strong wind behind us and by the time we saw the line of buoys it was too late, she would not bring up; our bows touched the nets, we swung round and were soon badly fouled, and eventually anchored with about half a ton of wire on the port propeller. Apparently the net defence had been put in place during the *Active's* absence the necessary instructions had been given to the Fleet signal, but not repeated to us. Almost before I had cleared my propellers I was appointed to the *Galatea*, a more modern and better ship than the *Active* and I was naturally pleased. My pleasure was short-lived and I went through the next few months learning that a junior captain, who perhaps feels rather a swell when he first puts on four stripes, is in fact a very small pawn in the game. I slept one night in the *Galatea*, having once more been through the tiresome job of mustering and signing for confidential books. In the morning when the mail came I noticed a letter addressed to Commodore Alexander Sinclair and put it on one side to be redirected. I was soon undeceived when a signal came that Commodore Sinclair was to hoist his broad pennant in *Galatea*, the captain of *Galatea* to report at Admiralty for orders.

Reporting at the Admiralty I was ordered to commission the *Calliope* at Chatham, even a better ship, and once more I was all pride at my command. I got together several officers I wanted and all went well until the day before the commissioning trial, when the signal came: Commodore Le Mesurer will hoist his broad pennant in the *Calliope* at nine o'clock to-morrow morning; and I was reduced once more to dust and ashes and to report at the Admiralty. At the Admiralty, my old shipmate Brand had become Naval Secretary. I was feeling slightly reduced and asked him if I could be sent somewhere where there were no commodores. He said the idea was I should go to the *Champion*, then being built. My feelings can be imagined when I learnt that she would not be ready for about nine months. Brand suggested I might go to the *Marshal Ney*, a monitor nearly ready, and I was thankful to close with the offer, not knowing what I was in for.
