#CHAPTER XVI

####H.M.S. “MARLBOROUGH"—1922

On leaving the destroyers I was appointed as Captain Superintendent of the Coastguard in the Western District, an appointment given me at my own request, as I was glad to get a spell on shore, and Sir Charles Madden had told me the Admiralty were rather puzzled as to what they should do with me. I had been in command at sea practically since the beginning of the War, but I was still a junior captain and I should have to wait before commanding a battleship. I had a very pleasant and not uninteresting two years ashore, and was then appointed to command the Marlborough Battleship in the Mediterranean Fleet.

Arrived in Malta I learnt that the *Marlborough* was at Constantinople and that I was to take passage in a cruiser due to sail. Rear-Admiral John Kelly, who had been a fellow passenger in the P. & O. coming out, was also on board and I learnt was to hoist his flag in the *Marlborough*, his proper flagship the *Benbow* being at Malta refitting. We arrived at Constantinople on the 17th of September, I took over command of the *Marlborough* in the morning and left in the afternoon for Chanak.

It might be as well here to make a short résumé of the situation as it appeared that day. The principal actors in the scene as far as we were concerned in the *Marlborough* were General Sir Charles Harrington in command of the troops in the whole area, Colonel Shuttleworth commanding the troops in Chanak, Mustapha Kemal, Ismet Pasha, and Franklin Bouillon or Boiling Frankie as the sailors irreverently christened him. Mustapha Kemal, the Turkish hero of the Gallipoli campaign, had since the peace been employed by the Allied commission to collect the arms in Anatolia which were due for surrender under the terms of the Armistice. No arms had been delivered since the landing of a Greek army in Smyrna, this latter the result, it was said, of an arrangement between M. Venizelos and Mr. Lloyd George. I am not sure with what object, but this particular move was perhaps the only one that could rouse the Turks to renewed warfare.

Mustapha's feat in reorganizing the army, entailing the breaking down of ammunition of all calibres in order to fit the guns and rifles he had, was truly prodigious.

Mustapha's position in the country was still very doubtful, even after the Greek army commenced to advance, and then he took the offensive which, in his own words, succeeded beyond his wildest dreams.

The effect of the defeat and rout of the Greek army had its immediate affect on the Allied position both in Constantinople and at Chanak.

On 12th September the Home Government had ordered General Harrington to be prepared to evacuate Chanak. On 17th September the French High Commissioner left Constantinople to visit Mustapha Kemal.

On the same day we in the *Marlborough* left Constantinople for Chanak, arriving there at daybreak the next morning, and from the moment the anchor went down I found myself back at work. Colonel Shuttleworth came on board as soon as we had anchored; he reported that Turkish cavalry were already across the neutral ground and he expected to be attacked in four days' time, but by cavalry only. He estimated fourteen to twenty days before infantry and guns could be in contact.

I went ashore on the Admiral's orders and rode round the whole position in order to get some idea how we could best co-operate. On the same day the French Government agreed to defending the Dardenelles. In the afternoon however the Spahis ordered out to support the 3rd Hussars refused to march.

General Harrington warned the government he was becoming doubtful of French and Italian support. A great campaign started in the French Press against French soldiers risking their lives in a possible conflict with Turkey. On the 19th the French and Italians left the sections of the trenches they were manning.

The position at Chanak was an unpleasant one from a military point of view, roughly a semicircle round the blunt end of the peninsula which reached out into the straits, culminating in Nagara point. Locally it was known as the Birdcage; it was completely dominated by the surrounding hills on the shore or southern side. Outside the birdcage there was a so-called neutral ground which included all these hillsides and twenty miles of country bordering the straits. The only road crossed the summit at a place called Eren Keui, on the hill just below was an important bridge over a deep donga; both road and bridge were visible from the ships and could be easily brought under fire. Having seen the position and ridden out to Eren Keui, I submitted the following report to the Rear-Admiral. The position can be held with the aid of the ship's guns against any attack unsupported by artillery. To hold Chanak would seem to be of the highest importance to the freedom of the passage of the straits. Heavy guns and howitzers are urgently required both to assist the defence and to cover a possible withdrawal.

The Admiral and Colonel-Commandant were in agreement that it would be the greatest mistake to give up the position. The following day, when the French and the Italians moved out, caused of course a temporary crisis, we landed every available man from the squadron to fill the gap, with field and machine-guns, and started in to dig and wire.

It is worth commenting here that in an emergency like this the obvious people to land would be the Royal Marines, but in the First Battle Squadron, as is indeed the practice throughout the service, the marines not only manned one of the turrets but also a six-inch battery, both of which in the present juncture it was absolutely necessary to keep manned, so that instead of men trained to land-warfare it was necessary to land just those people who could be best spared, and they were all the submerged tubes' crews and other torpedo ratings, since our torpedo armament would certainly not be used. This is a point I do think requires serious attention; it is bound to happen again and on perhaps an even more vital occasion.

The party in the trenches were therefore a scratch lot drawn from divers sources in the battleships and added to by small parties from the light-cruisers and destroyers. What they lacked in knowledge of land-fighting they made up for in energy, and by nightfall, under the direction of the sappers, they had reasonably well-defended trenches, at least too strong for cavalry to gallop through. I walked round the naval sector just before sunset and as I was leaving spoke to a petty officer, thinking he might be feeling a little lost in unaccustomed conditions. I said to him: “I don't suppose they will attack.” “I hope they will, sir,” he said with quite an air of disappointment at such a suggestion.

On Friday the 22nd information came through from Smyrna that the Turks definitely meant to attack the next day with 2,700 cavalry. The ships took up bombarding positions; with the C.R.A. we had worked out zones of fire for each ship, each sector being given a separate S.O.S. signal, with rocket signals for a general attack. The trench were manned all night.

On the 24th of September the Turkish cavalry rode up to the trenches but withdrew and reported back the position was too strong to attack without artillery preparation.

On the 17th a cavalry attack would probably have succeeded, once at close quarters it would be impossible to use the ships' guns and there was a large gap in the defences.

We estimated we had now ten days in the race for reinforcements. These on our side were arriving rapidly. The Gordons from Malta, Scottish Borderers from Egypt, were first to arrive, followed by the Royal Marines and Grenadiers from England and the North Staffords from Gibraltar. The latter regiment was commanded by my brother, the first time we had ever met on service. He and his regiment were however sent on to Constantinople.

The first guns to arrive were four-inch from Malta, without crews; these were manned by men from the *Marlborough* and it is amusing to think how pressed we were for time and how haphazard arrangements had to be. I sent for Lieutenant Llewellyn, showed him what looked like a Plateau high up on the hills on the Gallipoli side, overlooking the valley away to the east of Nagara Point, a valley not easily commanded by ships' guns. It was necessary to have guns up there; whether it was possible to get them there I had no means of knowing and no time to find out. I showed him the place and showed him the guns and gave him the crew, and said there is where I want them, and as soon as possible. In two days, from the plateau, a lamp started flashing: “Ready to open fire.” That was good work; I learnt something afterwards of how it was done. Having got his guns and his men ashore at Kilia (this meant rigging sheers and all the rest of it, for there were no piers then strong enough to take guns), he then discovered a broken-down car of some sort, which he proceeded to repair, put his guns behind it one by one and towed them at least a good deal of the journey. Not only did he get his own guns into position, but I later received a letter of appreciation from the officer in command at Kilia for the help this same officer and his tractor had been to them. I regret to say this officer was already under the swing of the axe, which was doing great execution about then. I tried my hardest, without success to get the order cancelled in view of this really remarkable achievement.

To land the six-inch guns the *Ajax* and *King George* were detailed, the mountings were made at Constantinople. The method of landing them was first to land a big kedge anchor, bury the fluke well and back it up, shackle a cat-block on the ring; the gun was then lowered down to the bottom of the sea, the end of a wire was attached to the gun, the other end rove through the block on the anchor and brought back to the ship's capstan, which hauled it ashore along the bottom.

We were fortunate enough to find on the peninsula a carriage for the transport of heavy guns; it was of German manufacture, evidently abandoned after the War. It proved most valuable, saving much time and labour, for one gun had a drag of over a mile to its mounting position.

The most difficult problem now was to organize for evacuation, should such become necessary, while still landing reinforcements. The more troops, guns, horses, landed at Chanak, the bigger the problem of getting them away.

====

We built piers at Nagara or strengthened existing ones, put mooring buoys down so that transports could go along. side. Similar steps were taken at Kilia the opposite side.

All this time the evacuation of the Christian population from the whole of Anatolia was proceeding, the evacuation was a tragedy which does not reflect much credit on Christianity as a whole, many of these Christian families had been so long in the country that they were to all intents Turkish and often had no other language but Turkish; they were not prepared to give up their religion and gave up everything and fled from the oncoming Turk who had vowed to sweep all Christians into the sea; and swept into the sea they were almost literally, a common sight was to see a minute Greek steamer putting to sea absolutely swarming with people, so crowded that even the gangways let down each side were occupied to the bottom step, and would inevitably be washed away directly the ship got outside, cases were only too common in which children were pushed into one steamer or caïque, parents in another, neither knowing where they were bound.

Many crossed in open boats to the Gallipoli peninsula, for it was largely assumed then that even if we abandoned Chanak we should hold on to the other side.

One of these boats crossing afforded some amusement in what was a pretty grim business. A family party were crossing in a smallish boat, much overloaded. There were on board a dozen or so men, women and children, farm implements, hens, goats, and towing behind a couple of oxen; in the centre of the boat was a stack of hay or fodder of some sort, on top of the stack was grandmother, and granny was bulky; most of the bulk it seems, as it afterwards turned out, must have consisted of all the family's petticoats.

As they were passing near the ship, for some reason or other the whole contraption capsized. Granny was left sitting on the water, literally sitting, and continuing to sit buoyed up by the petticoats while letting out the most piercing shrieks of alarm; they were all picked up but it is to be feared lost much of the little that remained to them

The water-supply for the village of Chanak and the troops was outside the wire, it was not possible to include it; water-tanks in lighters were sent from Constantinople and all ships kept distilling.

The position was now, and remained for the next few weeks, exceedingly tense. General Harrington was pressing Mustapha to hold a conference in order if possible to reach some agreement and avoid bloodshed; as a basis he offered that we should ourselves turn the Greek ships out of the Bosphorous and evacuate all the remaining Greek troops from the shores of the Marmora. Mustapha's chief argument when confronted with the fact that his troops were already over the neutral ground, was that his army were merely pursuing a beaten army, and that in any case the neutral zone was an arrangement come to with the late Sultan who was not recognized by the Kemalist party.

On October 1st Franklin Bouillon arrived, a mysterious figure who appeared to be both an agent for the French Government and the Turkish; the French had already a High Commissioner in Constantinople. The conference was continually postponed until the Turkish First Army was in position on the Ismid peninsula and the Second ready at Chanak.

Going back to September 22nd, the Turkish cavalry arrived that day at Eren Keui in considerable strength; the Third Hussars, who had been in touch all the time, now fell back on Chanak, blowing up the bridge as they retired. The Turks soon followed and were in sight from the trenches and from the ships.

The policy at the time, if such it could be called, was very confused; orders and counter-orders followed in quick succession. Information came through that the attack was to take place on October 1st, and on the same day I advised General Harrington the conference would take place on October 3rd at Mudania and that he had obtained a complete and immediate halt of the Turkish armies.

On October 3rd General Harrington proceeded to Mudania in H.M.S. *Iron Duke*, it had been decided that Bouillon should not attend the conference. He arrived however, in a French warship; it had also been decided exclude journalists—Bouillon's secretary was correspondent for *Le Matin*. At the Mudania conference the French and Italian generals had discretion to sign terms of peace; for some reason apparently the British Government would not give General Harrington the same powers. It seemed a pity and resulted in the long drawn-out business at Lausanne, where the Turks asked for and obtained far more than they had ever thought of at Mudania.

On October 5th the conference broke down, Bouillon had apparently promised far more than the Allied generals could concede. On October 6th the home Government told the General to be prepared to evacuate Constantinople and to strengthen the defences of Chanak as much as possible, a reversal of the policy of September 17th. On October 6th at Chanak it seemed impossible to avoid hostilities. While the conference was sitting, both sides were under a standstill order, but all the time the Turks were advancing. It was obvious unless something was done to keep them at arm's length, we were in the position of rats in a trap.

After the cavalry had been forced back behind the wire, there was little information of enemy movements, there were plenty of aircraft, the aircraft-carrier *Argus* having arrived, but the Turks only moved by night and were past masters of concealment by day.

A reconnaissance in force was ordered, consisting of two infantry battalions, two field batteries, two mountain batteries and a squadron of cavalry.

This force moved out in the afternoon under the guns of the *Marlborough*, and bivouacked that night without opposition, but in touch with the enemy forces, whose tactics seemed to be to sit down and watch proceedings from the high ground. The next morning a conference was called at Chanak; it was agreed to issue an ultimatum to take effect four hours after issue. At zero hour rapid fire was to be opened by all ships with every nature of gun.

The fire zones were rearranged and laid on every farmhouse, valley and gorge known to be occupied by the enemy, while certain other guns were laid on the roads and back areas.

While we were still at the conference a message came in from the C.O. of the Loyals in command of the reconnaissance, saying that he was surrounded and asking permission to open fire. It appeared that Turkish cavalry was working round to take possession of a ridge of hills overlooking the road back to Chanak. Colonel Shuttleworth immediately ordered our cavalry to gallop for the ridge, which led to the much discussed incident of a race between the Hussars and the Turkish cavalry which our people won by seventy yards. A parley took place on the top of the ridge, the C.O.'s of both sides stating that their orders were to occupy the ridge. Our man went further and stated his orders permitted him to fight for the ridge, whereupon the Turks withdrew.

The reconnaissance was again withdrawn behind the wire. By now sufficient troops and guns had arrived to constitute a division and General Mardon arrived to take command, and with regret we said good-bye to Colonel Shuttleworth, who on handing over the command sent the following letter to the admiral:


“On handing over command of the Dardanelles Defence Force, I wish, on behalf of myself and all ranks, to thank you and the officers and men of the Royal Navy and Marines for the invaluable assistance you have given us during the last sixteen critical days. Thanks to your help, Chanak is now defensible against attack. Should the enemy attack you will have the satisfaction of knowing it is your trenches and your wire that will help materially to hold him up.

“I want to thank you also for the detachments of artillery, seaplanes, aeroplanes, machine-guns and Lewis guns landed, for the immense help in organizing quays and disembarkation, for assistance with signals, mechanics of every kind, given in a most generous spirit. Each one of us is grateful and I write this as a record of our collective appreciation which I hope you will communicate to all ships, as a small return for all you have done.”


That was, I think, a very nice letter, very much appreciated by all naval ranks and ratings.

The situation was still critical. On the evening of the 5th of October the following message came through from Mudania: “We have had a very difficult day, unless they get all demands, they state that they propose to resume hostilities.” On the 6th we were all closed up at the guns, fire was to open at eleven, at ten-fifteen the news came through to stand fast, the conference had come to an agreement, the treaty was signed in so far as open hostilities were concerned. The Turks began to withdraw immediately; eighty-four guns were being disclosed in the neighbourhood of Chanak and it is interesting to note that all these guns had been got into position during the night and without being observed.

H.M.S. *Benbow* arrived and the admiral's flag was transferred to her. I ceased to be chief staff officer, and found myself with leisure to ride or walk all over the Gallipoli peninsula, examine the famous beaches, see the almost incredible positions the Australians captured and held at Anzac. I was able to make a careful study of all the forts on both sides of the straits with the ancient pieces mounted in them, with their slow-moving training gear. I came to the conclusion that if they hit a moving ship once, they could never be trained round quick enough to hit her again. All the mountings I saw had fixed sights, although others may of course have been removed.

It also appeared to me that these guns, and there were plenty of them, were all more or less mounted on the edge of a parapet, this parapet strengthened with rubble and mortar; that one modern salvo planted somewhere under the fort would more than likely bring the whole lot sliding down the hill.

There were mines; these could scarcely be effective in the fairway with a five-knot current. There was also a good deal about fixed torpedo tubes. I was unable to find where these had been. Presumably information about the forts, especially the degree of training reached by the guns' crews, We have come by before the War. With the knowledge we have now,  there would seem nothing to have stopped a modern squadron of battleships moving fast and plastering both sides as they went, from going through. What they would have done when there, opens up another problem.

While still waiting at Chanak, I had an unpleasant duty assigned to me. I was sent to the town of Gallipoli where a large contingent of White Russians had been in occupation for the last two or three years. There were perhaps two or three thousand of them. I was to inform these people that the Allies were in the near future proposing to give back the peninsula to the Turks, and could no longer offer them protection.

A pathetic business. The general in command, with a sort of council, came off to the ship. They listened in silence; at the end the old general said: “That's not possible, not England, not England;” and they kept on saying. All my talk of high policy, necessity, and so on carried no conviction, certainly not to myself, it was too much like having provided a raft to save a lot of people from drowning, the Allies turned round and said: on second thoughts we want that raft for some one else; after all, you had better drown. They explained they had no money, where were they to go? There was no answer, the Turkish policy was to repatriate all Russians, which to these people meant death.

I was glad to leave, a messenger with such news could hardly expect to be popular.

We were ordered to Constantinople, where we remained some months while the great Lord Curzon wrangled with Ismet Pasha, the latter coming away with all he wanted and a good deal more probably than he ever expected.

On November 5th the Sultan was deposed, and in order to prevent his too rapid decease he was smuggled out of the palace and put on board the *Malaya*. What exactly happened to the numerous ladies of the harem and their attendants I never heard.

The Bosphorous in midwinter is a not too pleasant place to lay. Manœuvring a battleship in those crowded waters with its strong current was interesting, the approach easy and dignified, the departure neither easy nor dignified, being more often than not like the crab, sideways into the Marmora. From Constantinople I was dispatched to the Island of Prinkipo on another unpleasant job. In Prinkipo a large school for Russian refugee girls had been established and maintained mostly by funds collected in London. I had to repeat my message recently given at Gallipoli. Prinkipo and all the islands of the Marmora must soon revert to Turkish control. The head of the school was a Scotsman and with him his wife.

I gave a party on board to a hundred or more of them from ages of six to seventeen, a good-looking lot, all orphans from the Black Sea ports evacuated by British warships.

Arrangements were made to distribute these girls. I believe many went to Canada; let us hope they found happy homes at last. The plight of the Russian refugee in Constantinople during that winter of 1922–3 was pretty distressing, pathetic-looking elderly people, the men generally in some faded army uniform, stood in rows at the entrance to the bazaars or on the Galata Bridge, holding out bootlaces or matches for sale—not all princes and princesses or counts and countesses but certainly from what used to be called the upper class—while in dance hall or café their daughters could be found making what money they could how they could. On the whole they were worse off than a similar community in Shanghai for the general standard of living was a lower one.

Ordered to Malta to refit I was joined there by my wife and we had a month's most enjoyable holiday, and back to Constantinople to wait for the final evacuation. These were days when no one could expect to remain in command long, there were few ships and many captains, so that I was not surprised to hear from the Admiralty  should be relieved shortly and that I was to go as Commodore to Devonport Barracks. I wrote to my friend Watson, saying of course I go where you want me, but I should like to go to the Admiralty, as I had a childish desire to see how the machine worked from the inside; moreover, I had never been in a barracks, and they made no appeal. I dare say I was wrong, but I was appointed to the Admiralty as D.T.S.D. or Director of Training and Staff Duties.

I left the *Marlborough* with great regret; the captain of a battleship has an idle life compared to destroyers; he has his responsibilities but so many efficient heads to all the departments, that it is much more impersonal, only when things go wrong is the captain really wanted.
