#CHAPTER XVII

####THE ADMIRALTY

There is much of interest that could be written about the Admiralty for there are not many naval officers who really know how its different departments function, to most it is just a great block of buildings which they often pass when in London and know as the Admiralty.

On the other hand, a certain small number of officers are almost like homing pigeons, released from the sea they flutter back to an office stool as a matter of course; but it is a small number who are familiar with every floor at some stage of their career.

I confess that I went there full of vulgar curiosity, I had rarely been inside the building and I was anxious to learn something of what went on inside. In two years it is possible to see and learn a lot, but not round all the corners, and one can only record impressions of an outsider let in for a short time to look at the navy from the heart of the machine.

Some things impressed me as curious, but there again the navy does not stand still and facts which interested me then may well have ceased to be.

I was labelled “Director of Training and Staff Duties”, short title, D.T.S.D.—every one at the Admiralty has a short title.

My title seemed rather an important one, but I soon found out that I certainly did not direct the training of the navy as the name might imply and I never found out what “staff duties” at the end of the title really meant.

I found out that my opposite number at the War Office bearing a somewhat similar title, had in no sense similar duties. Perhaps there can be little similarity between land and sea staff work, because they lead up to such different culminating points.

As I understand it a general must sit in a tent or dug-out possibly miles from the scene of the fighting and be continually receiving reports by telephone or other means from the various units of his command and on these reports issue orders, which may take a long or a short time to take effect but certainly an appreciable time.

At sea contact is made with the enemy, staff work ceases to be effective. The decision is not only for the admiral to make but it is for him to carry it out, either from a plot of the enemy's fleet relative to his own which has been computed from a series of reports from his cruisers or aeroplanes, or from what he can see with his own eyes; it is for him personally to fight the battle and himself give the order to turn this way and that, and that instantly. The rate of approach may be fifty miles an hour and he must himself be in the midst of the fight. He cannot weigh the pros and cons from a distance.

But in the less exciting atmosphere of Whitehall it might make for convenience if similar staff titles meant responsibility for similar duties.

That the work of War Office staff is so dissimilar to that of the naval staff at the Admiralty would appear to come from the fact that when the War Office had their great “wash and brush-up", the Esher Committee swept out many civil departments and introduced purely military staff departments; whereas the naval staff at the Admiralty was superimposed on the civil departments, which continued to exist, making uncomfortable lying and it seemed to me a great deal of duplication, the last word lying with the civil departments rather than with the naval staff.

The material side of naval staff work appears to have developed so much better than the personnel side.

There is a very necessary plans division, entirely for material, there is no plans division for the personnel, but there were two curious divisions called M. and N., “military and naval”; at first guess fittingly manned by naval officers with real experience of the navy at sea. Actually, they are entirely manned by civilians, and it seemed these two divisions, whose members’ nearest acquaintance with a bluejacket might be the top of a bus, had his welfare much in their hands.

There must be always presumably the problem of the civilian official working half a lifetime in the same office, as against the naval officer who spends a year or two in an office and then off to sea again.

How many admirals are there who on appointment to the Admiralty expect to change this or that? I had a vigorous example staying with me not so long ago. Watch him enter, the invisible net cast over him, ushered into his cubby-hole where he will work unremittingly for the next two years, wholly immersed in the details of his department; until the last day comes to wear his blacked coat and striped dittoes. Off he goes to command some fleet or station, leaving the Whitehall octopus exactly and precisely the same as when he entered so full of crusader's hope, and yet of course the machine as a whole works. The Board of Admiralty, or at least the naval members, almost always certainly in modern times, meet the approval of the navy as a whole, and that would apply more especially I believe to the First Sea Lords of the last twenty years, both as members of the Board and chief of the naval staff. It would be agreed that the navy has been especially fortunate in her senior naval members.

Returning to my own position as D.T.S.D., although I thought it ill-defined, it was by no means without interest, for, being ill-defined, it seemed that papers on every sort of subject came to me for remark, which at least gave an insight to what was going on. I learned that apparently a Board decision can be given with all the Sea Lords dissenting, and that the entry of officers to the Sea Service was not the concern of the naval staff but entirely that of the First Lord, or in practice his private secretary acting in the name of the Patronage Committee, which seemed a curious survival. One would suppose that the entry of officers, both their numbers and quality, would be the result of careful planning by the naval staff, who might be expected to know more about the requirement of the Sea Service than even the private secretary of the First Lord. For it is, after all, these officers who have to lead in war, and only naval officers themselves can realize the unremitting care and attention required in peace time, not only to train the men so that they are always ready, but also in the restricted and artificial condition of a modern man-of-war, to keep them contented and ready in case they should be wanted for something we will hope will some day seem absurdly far off.

My impression was that the material side of the naval staff had been so much more developed than the personal and human, and much more difficult side. Perhaps some day there will be a Plans Division for the personnel, and with such a division, possibly the order which led to so much trouble at Invergordon would never have gone out.

My duties also entailed a good deal of committee work. One committee I remember was on the future of the Royal Marines. I forget the actual terms of reference. Sir Charles Madden, shortly to become First Sea Lord, was chairman. Its main issue was to consider wider scope in the employment of senior Royal Marine officers, whose experience and training is in a measure largely wasted.

It seemed the committee drew up a very useful report to the effect that in all naval bases which were either islands, or which had no appreciable hinterland, the defences should be manned by the Royal Marines under their own officers, both men and officers having served at least six years at sea first.

There seems no doubt that the safety of the fleet would be rendered more secure if all harbour defences were manned and directed by a corps familiar in every way with the requirements of a ship, familiar with naval signalling, and able as a matter of course to distinguish between one class of ship and another, and their nationality. It would, moreover, provide suitable employment for senior officers of great experience, of whom the navy now cannot make full use.

However, I well remember the depressing remark of the civilian member of the committee as we rose from our labours, our finding completed. The chairman remarked that he hoped some action would be taken, to which the reply was: “Oh! no, nothing will come of it, the ground has all been covered before.” One could not help wondering why, if this gentleman was so sure of the ultimate result of the finding, we had been asked to spend four or five days on a subject apparently already dead. Presumably like so many committee reports, it went straight into a pigeon-hole and there remained. All the same, I believe the finding of the committee was a good one, and if brought into force would contribute to the safety of naval bases, relive the army of much immobile work, and ensure the nation gets full value from an exceptionally fine body of officers, who have been so exhaustively trained to be expert at the work to which they would be allotted.

Shortly before Christmas 1925 I completed my term of Admiralty service and went on half-pay.

Half-pay is, or was, one of those unhappy experiences that all senior officers of the executive branch had to go through, some in heavier doses than others. It is a period which you will notice that treasury officials or Members of Parliament, when computing naval officers' pay, will tactfully ignore, and yet it is the amount of half-pay which gives the key to the average pay.

Quite recently some one writing to The Times to explain why naval officers should not have marriage allowance while army and air force officers should have it, quoted the pay of naval doctors compared to army doctors; it would seem a doctor is a doctor and paid as such, but in any case a doctor even a naval doctor does not go on half-pay. Personally I have always been against marriage allowance in principle, on the grounds that an officer should be paid according to the worth of the service he renders to the State, which should not be qualified in any way by private responsibilities. And yet there could be no justice in granting a privilege of this sort to officers in one service and withholding it from another, especially as the naval service must be more expensive for a married man than in either of the other services, for there can be no married quarters, no free doctoring for wives and children, and no free passages; always a married naval officer must live in a mess while maintaining a separate home on shore, while if he is to see anything of his wife travelling expenses and hotel bills are constant and heavy.
