#CHAPTER XIX

####AFRICA 1931-3

On return from China I was glad to be able to return to Wraxall and enjoy the blessings of the land, although a year's half pay with heavy education bills to meet was not good for the bank balance. Financially a naval officer's progress is difficult, living on an overdraft during half pay which he hopes to pay off while on full pay has its anxieties, he finds also that his expenses increase not less than his pay as he climbs the ladder.

Admiral Sir Charles Madden, then First Sea Lord, had told me he wished me to go back to China as C.-in-C. and hoped that I would be appointed; later I had a communication from the naval secretary confirming this, but adding that he did not think that Sir Charles would have his way as there were others senior to me whose claims could not be ignored. This was, of course, true enough; all the same a great disappointment to me as I felt that I had reached an understanding of the problems in China which should be valuable; I had many Chinese friends whose confidence I felt I had won. The time had come when certainly in the highest quarters in China the extreme anti-British feeling of the past few years had died down, in fact almost disappeared. I knew also the Japanese admiral, Yonai, now the head of the Japanese Navy; he had been my opposite number on the river, we had been able to render each other mutual services on behalf of our respective nationals in difficult times. It would have been easy to work with him and perhaps help towards a solution of the difficulties of Japan in China, for there were difficulties even if quite undeserving of the ruthless action since taken.

It was not to be, and in the autumn of I930 I was appointed C.-in-C. of the Africa station. If I could not go to China or back to fleet work, there could be no more delightful appointment for an admiral than Africa with Simonstown as headquarters with its charming Admiralty House. It would indeed be difficult to imagine a more delightful setting for a house, with its gardens and lawns running down to a beautiful sandy beach and bathing pool. The view from the house across Simon's Bay to the Hottentot Holland Mountains, with their ever-changing light and shade and snowcapped in winter, rising out of the deep blue of the water of the bay, leaves a never-to-be-forgotten picture.

The house itself, not big, but comfortably built in the Dutch style, was possibly the first possession secured by England as a residence for the admiral commanding in 1795, and remains the one possession of the Admiralty and England in the Union of South Africa.

No one could claim there is too much work involved for the admiral commanding the station in peace-time, but perhaps more than is apparent on the surface, for the admiral has, since the Statute of Westminster took effect, a peculiar position as a British official with his headquarters in a British Dominion, and in a measure responsible to both the British and Dominion Governments.

In February 1931 we arrived by the *Balmoral Castle* at Capetown, and were received with the usual official and at the same time very warm, welcome extended to the admiral on taking up his command. I had been fortunate once more to get Hector Woodhouse to come with me as secretary, also Locker who had been with me in China, together with with Peter Dawnay as flag-lieutenant, a personality who greatly helped to oil the wheels of all Admiralty House social endeavours.

My first duty on arrival was to be sworn in as Ηigh Commissioner to act until the arrival of Sir Herbert Stanley who had been appointed to that office. This separation of the offices of the Governor and that of High Commission was a recent change, consequent again on the Statute of Westminster, which made the Governor-General the representative of His Majesty in the Union of South Africa, while certain native territories remained outside the Union and were subject to the rulings of the British Parliament and British law. My own position as an admiral commanding a British squadron was legally somewhat similar to the native States. Any diplomatic correspondence would, for instance, pass through the hands of the High Commissioner and not the Governor-General, so that for the time being I was responsible as Commander-in-Chief to myself as High Commissioner, and actually the only armed force the High Commissioner can call on in case of need to act in the native territories is the Royal Navy, although these territories are many hundreds of miles from the coast.

In practise, of course, the procedure is not in line with the legal position. The admiral not only works under the Governor-General but is constantly associated with his ministers in the Union Government, and especially with the Minister of Defence.

Thirty odd years before, when I was on what was then called the Cape station, the country was very differently divided. The Cape was a British colony with a Governor and High Commissioner in one person. Natal was a separate British colony with its own Governor. Both the Cape colony and Natal were to all intents English with British garrisons.

To the north were the Boer republics, the Transvaal and Orange Free State, with certain independent or semi-independent native States on the borders of both owing allegiance then as now to England. The South African War changed the whole balance. Rather curiously, that war, won by England after a hard struggle, has resulted in the political life of the countries concerned passing almost entirely into the hands of the former residents of the late Boer republics. Actually the residents of British origin and those of Dutch or other European origin are numerically fairly evenly balanced and a considerable proportion of the original Africaans-speaking people is drawn from what are known as poor whites, not at present of great value to the country but having the vote; and a great deal lies in that fact.

More and more the parliamentary power and indeed the linguistic life of the country is passing to Africaans-speaking. Largely for political reasons it has been made the language of the country by the simple expedient of making all government officials down to the humblest grade compulsorily bilingual, which in practise means a good working knowledge of Africaans with a rudimentary knowledge of English. History rather shows the similar action taken to eliminate the French language after the arrival of the Huguenots in large numbers.

It is worth noting that the business enterprise, the development of railways, docks, harbours, public works of all kinds, and not forgetting the gold and diamond mines, appears to have been mainly the work of Britishers. It might be claimed that the wealth of South Africa has been produced by the Uitlander as he was once called, while the South African of
Dutch origin, although losing a severe war to do it, has gained a virtual dictatorship in political control and language even to proscribing what flag should be flown. In face a quiet and persistent conquest of what was almost a part of England and all the Englishman and perhaps more often the Scotsman holds dear.

It is curious that having gained so much there is still in South Africa a party who want a Republic, forgetting perhaps the responsibilities involved, in a land hungry world. We were fortunate in finding Lord and Lady Clarendon installed in Government House and our relations with them throughout our stay were always most happy.

Politically it was an unhappy period, feeling between South Africans of Dutch origin and those of British nationality was very bitter and yet to meet socially there was certainly nothing to choose as far as we were concerned, both were equally charming and hospitable. General Hertzog, the Prime Minister, has made many speeches in the past which might be described as strongly anti-British, and yet to meet, no one could be more kind or easily approached. Mr. Pirow, not at that time renowned for any liking of things British, was another who had the knack of being easy to meet and get on with. Colonel Creswell, at the time Minister of Defence, had perhaps a greater knowledge of the world outside and the Englishman's line of thought than any of the others with the exception of General Smuts who was leader of the opposition and about whom the Government spokesmen had nothing too bad to say. I forget how it was I first met him and Mrs. Smuts, but for some reason they were particularly kind to my wife and I, and we shall always remember the delightful week-end we spent with them on the farm at Irene near Pretoria.

I shall always remember Mrs. Smuts, who is renowned for calling a spade a spade, ending some discussion we were having with the remark: “I hate you English, but I like you individually.” She was one of those who found it hard to forget the horrors of the South African War, mild as those seem now after more recent wars, and yet she admitted to liking us individually; I felt we couldn't really be so bad as we are so generally painted.

I found to my surprise that I was responsible in a measure for the South African Navy, consisting of two trawlers and a sloop in the last stages of serviceable life. This was a dreadful business Here was a navy perfectly useless in war and equally useless as a training squadron in peace-time. One officer had, I think, been eleven years in his trawler. The only possible chance of a change of service was to move to the other trawler, and the only hope of promotion was that one or other of the commanding officers should die. I can't think why they didn't.

The sloop, equally useless for purposes of war, was used for surveying and did provide sea training if not war training. On the other hand I found at Capetown, Durban, East London, and Port Elizabeth that there were good and keen naval reserve detachments; these detachments lacked facilities for training. I recommended the navy as a navy should
be abolished and all the money voted for naval purposes should be spent on the naval reserve. One of the commitments of the South African Government was to provide five
hundred seamen gunners in case of war; up to date none had been trained nor were there facilities in South Africa for training them. It was recommended that these should, while belonging to the reserve, be trained on board the ships of the British squadron in South African waters, the standard at the same time being reduced so that he should be trained to man only those guns which he would in emergency be required to man, the standard required for a seaman gunner in the British service being unnecessary and unobtainable without sending them all to the schools in England. These changes were all agreed to and the South African Navy ceased to exist while the reserve took on a new lease of life.

But besides the Union of South Africa the African station includes many other duties, its range extending over the whole long stretch of the west coast and part of the east coast and Madagascar. On these coasts the admiral comes into touch with several British colonies and with territories of France, Spain, Portugal and Belgium. The most important and the largest of our own colonies is Nigeria, with a population of forty millions of people and about half a million square miles. There is the Gold Coast, Sierra Leone, the Gambia, all different in their Governments and in the relationship between white and black within their different spheres, nor of course are the problems leading to such relationship at all similar.

In South Africa there is a large white farming and commercial population; in the African colonies the white population is mainly official to point only one contrast. My chief concern in these large and important west coast areas was to sow the seed or assist the growth of some common defence policy, a subject which had hitherto not been of great importance, for naturally the first concern of the various Governments has been, and is, the internal development and prosperity of the teeming native populations and it is curious to note the different processes of development which has come about in endeavours to reach the same goal. A degree of familiarity between white and black has, for instance, been reached in the Gold Coast which would not be tolerated for a moment in the Union of South Africa. Then I had to privilege of paying a visit to the Governors of the great territories of the Congo each side of Stanley Pool, administered by France and Belgium, and to the Portuguese Governor of Angola. Here again are other and different methods of developing native races. In the Union of South Africa one gets the impression that the white races are afraid of the native races gaining power, and believe in keeping them out of any sort of employ where they might compete with white labour, instead of perhaps leading them to develop as loyal and useful citizens; but the problem is admittedly a most difficult one. The contrast between what a native in the Congo territory, or even in our own countries of Nigeria or the Gold Coast, may be allowed in the way of responsible work, to what he may be allowed to do further south, is very marked and forms an interesting study to the irresponsible observer.

From Ludderitz and Walvis Bay I was able to see something of the old German colony of South West Africa, and from Ludderitz we motored out to the centre of the alluvial diamond industry.

Owing to the glut of diamonds at that time no work was in progress, the colony was entirely German, and the process appeared to be to run light railways out radiating from the works. The surface to a depth of two or three feet of absolute desert was loaded into trucks, and then dealt with at the Works. As these diamonds in considerable quantity are on, or near, the surface over a very wide area, the most elaborate Precautions are taken to prevent unauthorized persons from leaving the few roads through the district. One can hardly imagine a more unpleasant place to have to spend one’s days, not a green thing in sight, it practically never rains and all water has to be carried many hundred miles by rail on specially constructed tank cars, all houses and workshops had double doors and windows to keep the sand out, for it seems it nearly always blows, and the air is full of hot sand varying in density from day to day. In spite of all these drawbacks, the community, men, women and children, looked remarkably healthy, and social services such as cinemas, canteens, dance halls and so forth were at a very high level. Owing to stoppage of work as regards output, the whole staff was employed overhauling the machinery, stripping down locomotives and rolling stock, and the workshops were on a big scale and splendidly equipped. A comparatively new industry in Ludderitz, again German, is the canning of crayfish, which are caught in quantities round the bay. From Walvis Bay I flew to Windhoek, by invitation of the Governor of the South West Province. An interesting flight over the Marble Mountains, across the desert and then across the wide district owned by Liebeg, on which thousands of cattle graze on what from the air looks much like the desert, actually it grows a sort of reddish grass on which cattle flourish.

After flying over such country, Windhoek itself is a pleasant surprise, there are water and trees and a certain amount of green, while the gardens at Government House are remarkable for what is I suppose one of the finest collections of succulent plants ever got together, and I found my host and his wife were both enthusiastic collectors of these rare and curious plants.

A reception was held at the club in honour of my visit, and I was able to meet most of the leading people of Windhoek; there were German officers in plenty, all in the uniform of the Kaiser's Army and complete with iron crosses, but I was told on the whole the white population of that time was pleased at being under a mandate of the Union of South Africa. It seems now since the rise of Nazi power, political conditions in the country are not so easy.

The return flight was not to be a very happy one; all went well until we were nearing the coast, when we flew into a sandstorm, a red sandstorm like a heavy red fog, only more gritty. To avoid the storm the pilot climbed until we were looking down on the cloud of sand, but no sight of the ground remained. We were flying, I believe, at fourteen thousand feet, when we suddenly dived down. The effect on me was disastrous. I thought the drums of my ears would surely burst, and the pain was so excruciating that I should have been only too thankful to crash as long as there was no delay about it. However, there was no crash, we flattened out and landed beautifully. I asked why the devastating dive, and the pilot explained he knew we were flying approximately at right angles to the coast, but apparently the storm was just as heavy over the sea. He realized that if he went on long enough he would get out of the sandstorm, but also would lose his landmarks. Under the circumstances, while still in doubt, he caught sight of the white line of breakers on the coast and dived on them; well, I have flown a certain amount on various occasions, but I hope I may not have to dive like that again. It evidently doesn't suit me, for no one else in the plane seemed to have suffered in the same way.

We had an interesting trip up the Congo, through the Devil's Pool to Matadi, where I left the flagship and went by train to visit the Belgian Governor-General at Leopoldville on Stanley Pool, and then across the pool to call on the Governor-General of French Equatorial Africa. There is a large island in Stanley Pool, roughly five or six miles long and two or three wide, a sort of no-man's-land, which fugitives from justice of both French and Belgian territory use as a refuge. Periodically the two authorities combine to clear the island of its undesirable residents, but I was informed this was no light undertaking, the island was thick bush without roads, and if a search was arranged, nearly always news of the undertaking would leak out and those wanted would slip away by canoe the night before and lie low till the hunt was up. The obvious solution to keep a permanent police force in the island fell through, I understand, on a matter of agreement or non-agreement of ownership of the island.

The French Governor-General took me to see the new bridge over a tributary of the Congo he had just opened the road over the bridge led to Point Noire on the coast where an artificial harbour—and I believe a very fine one, unfortunately I had no time to see it—was being built. Hitherto all exports for sea transport had to be shipped across Stanley Pool into Belgian territory and then to Matadi by rail. Point Noire is designed to give French Equatorial Africa direct access to the west coast ocean transport.

Matadi itself is remarkable for an immense and modern hotel, luxuriously built and furnished; as a commercial venture it must have been costly, for both going up and returning, my flag-lieutenant and I were I think the only occupants.

Unfortunately I had to cut short my last west coast cruise, there being a reduction made in naval pay, which had been accepted quite loyally, but at the same time England went off the Gold Standard while South Africa remained on. Hitherto we had on the station always been paid in gold sovereigns, now we were to be paid in English paper pounds, worth on shore twelve and sixpence. This was a cut of not ten per cent, but something like forty per cent. Officers and men with wives and families in South Africa were unable to meet their obligations, while men who remitted home to their families, either had to reduce the allotment, or have insufficient margin left when changed into local money for their needs. It was apparently difficult for the Treasury to understand the facts, and for a time the position was a little strained, and it is very satisfactory to remember how well the men took what was in fact a very serious financial crises for them until the powers that be brought out an adequate scheme of compensation.

During out stay in South Africa, by the courtesy and generous hospitality of the South African Government, we saw much of the country, travelling in the greatest luxury and comfort. We paid a visit to Rhodesia, the Victoria Falls and perhaps what we all enjoyed most, the famous Sabi Game Reserve: a wonderful experience, which one can hope every visitor to South Africa may have, and yet in its very popularity there is a danger its charm may be, at least, reduced.

Besides the longer shore expeditions involving train journeys, we made many camping expeditions in the wonderful country which lies between Capetown and Durban, motoring on roads, which it must be admitted, would in England certainly be labelled impassable for motor traffic, but unsurpassed for holiday camping and quite passable if not taken too fast. A great tip we found, as probably every one else has, is not to go on too late, find your site and have the camp pitched and supper cooked before dark.

The eastern coastline of the station runs for a considerable distance inside the Union of South Africa, including the important seaports of Port Elizabeth, East London and Durban in Natal. These are all fine harbours, Port Elizabeth only recently converted from an open anchorage to a first-class harbour by the completion of the breakwater. East London again is in process of being made into a first-class harbour. Only a short time back all these ports were well known for the method of transporting passengers from shore to tender by means of what was called a “Mammy chair”, a wickerwork contrivance by which passengers were slung out by the ship's derrick and lowered into the waiting tug, for this is a rough weather coast and nearly always a swell running. But those are other days; now the largest ships go alongside and passengers land in comfort.

Leaving Durban, its pointsettias and beautiful gardens and famous golf course, we go east into Portuguese territory first to Lorenzo Marques or Delagoa Bay, the finest natural harbour on the coast, and so to Beira still in Portuguese territory and the nearest outlet to the sea for Rhodesia. There is naturally much British capital invested in Beira. All these ports are highly vulnerable to an overseas enemy should there ever be one threatening South Africa, and when one reads of the, perhaps rather advertised, new defences of Capetown, important as these are for Capetown, it must be well known that there are shorter routes to the heart of the country.

Mozambique, farther up the coast and once the centre of a great slave trade, afforded us a glimpse of the less advanced Portuguese territory. Our Portuguese friends were determined we should waste no hour of what had to be a short visit. Somewhere about six o'clock in the morning we left the ship in company with the Governor and his wife and other officials, to visit native territory on the mainland, Mozambique itself being on an island. After driving some miles we were most hospitably entertained at a sort of picnic lunch in a clearing in the forest. While approaching the clearing we passed the carcass of an enormous lioness which had been speared the night before by natives. Following the lunch, the Governor held a parade, or Durbar, of all the native tribes in the district; after the parade and speech, a dance commenced which I was informed would continue until daylight next morning, and might go on two or three days and nights. Later, the whole party returned to the ship except my flag-lieutenant and I who were to shoot buffalo at daylight. After dark that evening we went out in cars to try and get a leopard in the headlights, but had no luck. The party returning to the ship saw two on the road. Later, after a meal and a short sleep, we set off again in a car, the native commissioner of the district, another Portuguese officer, myself, and my flag-lieutenant. We had not gone very far along a forest track when the officer driving got cramp and asked if I would mind driving. That was all plain sailing until I was warned we were coming to a bridge and it was difficult. I was advised to go over in low gear and keep moving, for if I stopped it might be difficult to get the car off the bridge and not possible to reverse. Still pondering what manner of bridge this might be, we came round a sharp bend and we were on it. It consisted of bamboo or rattan hawsers, stretched across a river some sixty feet below, across the hawsers were laid wooden planks, lashed to the hawsers each end and pretty loosely lashed at that. The whole contrivance was a little more than the width of a car, and no side or guard rails. As the car passed each slat or plank it made a terrific noise, while the whole bridge sagged down in the middle with the weight of the car, and I understood the low gear, for getting off the bridge was climbing up about forty-five degrees, and Heaven forbid that I should have had to back off that bridge in the dark.

As dawn was breaking we stopped and were informed hereabouts were buffalo and lion in plenty. At the same time my friend and host remarked that he was a tired man and thought he would sleep in the car until we were ready to return, undoubtedly also a wise man, for what we were to do was definitely foolish, to walk up to lion or buffalo in reeds as high or higher than our heads, and at times a clear vision of a few yards. I sympathized with Peter Dawnay, who remarked that he thought the rifle he carried was of rather small calibre. We had an interesting walk, but saw neither lions nor buffalo, they were not at home that morning and about ten o'clock the heat was sufficient excuse to stop hunting the greater mammals and return to the car, perhaps a little relieved at not having met a charging buffalo at short range. I volunteered to drive back. The thought of that bridge was unsettling, but I felt I should be much more fearful as a passenger, only actually it looked worse in daylight when its flimsy structure was really visible, and the river looked a very long way down.

We parted from our kind hosts in the early afternoon. If we had no buffalo, it had at least been all most interesting. That night I entertained on board to dinner the Governor and his lady, and other officials, and by the time we said good night we had been very nearly non-stop for forty-eight hours.

Our next port of call was Majunga, in Madagascar, and our French hosts here were perfectly charming. It seemed there was nothing too much trouble to make our stay enjoyable. I had intended to go by rail to Antannarivo.

Madagascar is rather off the beaten track, and I should have liked to have made a longer stay, three days was all too short, the first as usual taking up with paying and returning official calls, dining with the Military Governor of the port, followed by a dance which gave us an opportunity of meeting most of the French residents.

The following morning we went off to shoot guinea fowl, which served for a good walk and an opportunity of seeing something of the country. The actual shooting would not be considered great sport from an English point of view. I have always found guinea fowl on the west coast either legging it along the ground or in comparatively low bush. In Madagascar they occupy the very tops of very high trees, and it's a case of first spot your bird, which isn't easy even when a native assures you it is there. It is no good trying to make them fly, no amount of noise at the bottom of the tree makes them move. The only other living thing we saw in the forest were lemurs. The only animal, I have heard it said, which in a wild state will come to a human being for safety. Certainly it is a fact that one did that day jump from a tree into the arms of one of the party. The following day we went off with the Governor and his lady and a mixed party of officers to shoot caïman. We embarked in tugs on the river and, moving slowly down, you shot as they slid down the banks. It had to be quick and accurate shooting, for until he moves you probably see nothing, and you must get him in the spine if you want to stop him in his tracks. We got several, but not very big ones. Some we saw in the distance out on mud flats, practically inaccessible, were enormous. One hesitates to say how big, but I should think well over twenty feet, and they seemed to stand three or four feet at the shoulder. When moving off, they looked like some prehistoric monster.

That night I had the Governor and principal officials on board to dine, followed by a dance on board to all who could come, and a very cheery evening it was. As our last guest left the ship, up anchor and away back to Durban to refuel and back to Simonstown.

We left South Africa full of regrets that our time had come to an end, for if Mrs. Smuts's dictum be generally followed and they hate the English collectively and like them individually, they are in South Africa one and all so overwhelmingly kind to the British admiral and his family temporarily in their midst, that these, at least, leave with the impression that they have been for two years honoured and welcome guests in almost perfect surroundings.
