# CHAPTER II

#### THE MEDITERRANEAN - 1892-5

I passed out of the *Britannia* in December 1892, being then aged fifteen,and was duly appointed to H.M.S. *Dreadnought*, and ordered to join at Malta, taking passage in the P. & O. *Massillia*, sailing from London.

This was a big adventure. I knew a little of London, for I had often stayed with my maternal grandmother. Much of London was then paved with cobblestones similar to the *pavé* still to be seen in France. Rubber tyres and wooden blocks on the roads had not yet been introduced; the horses' hoofs and iron tyres produced a peculiar roar which has now gone from London. It was the day of the hansom cab, although that truly delightful conveyance had not yet come to its best; later when rubber tyres had come into general use, and better springing, a hansom cab with a good horse was hard to beat as a comfortable conveyance.

After a voyage in the *Massillia*, which stands now as one of many, but always distinct as the first, we arrived in Sliema Harbour after dark, put in to an Admiralty tug and and transported round to the Grand Harbour, and I duly stepped on my first seagoing ship; Captain, afterwards Admiral, Sir Arthur Moore in command. Arthur Moore must have been as fine a captain as a youngster could possibly have, a mixture of severity and kindness. I think the senior officers stood in awe of him more than did we midshipmen. We had, if the “old man” was in sight, always to be running; he could not bear to see a midshipman walking. I was his doggie or A.D.C. for a year. He used to start me off on a message and when I had gone a few yards call me back, and, waving a large hand at me in a peculiar way he had, would say “always run my boy when you are given an order", but as long as one ran, and ran fast, all was well.

In the wardroom Brand was the junior lieutenant, after
wards to become Captain of the Fleet in the Great War, Second Sea Lord, and C.-in-C. at Plymouth. A good friend to me, and with perhaps more influence on my career than any one else in the service. Daddy Braithwaite, the naval instructor, was a relic of other days, and always wore a top hat on Sundays.

In the gunroom Field was the sub., later to become First
Sea Lord.

I don't suppose the addition of three new members to the gunroom mess was very welcome. It was a particularly small gunroom, and had not seating room for every one. We, the more junior members, had a form outside the door on which we sat while our elders fed. When they, or some of them, came out, we went in.

But the *Dreadnought* was known as a “happy ship”, and in spite of overcrowding, and the fact that on the bulkhead there reposed on an ornamental bracket a short cane, with the inscription underneath, “Little Benjamin our ruler”, I do not remember ever seeing it used; and the gunroom was a happy if uncomfortable mess, the happy part due no doubt to the personality of Field who besides many virtues was a one-man entertainer with a reputation throughout the service. As a conjuror he was first class, as a performer on the guitar or any sort of musical instrument he was hard to beat, while he was equally good at weight-lifting feats and gymnastic turns.

No wonder he eventually became First Sea Lord, at a time too, when the navy had, we hope, sunk to its lowest ebb, and all the gymnastic feats or conjuring trucks in the world were required to cope with the situation.

Malta itself, always an attractive place, was much less crowded in those days, but there was no Marsa Club, and where the club is now was a good place for quail or snipe in season.

There was no breakwater, and consequently a good deal of discomfort in the Grand Harbour, especially in gregale weather when a big sea would run right in and send spray flying over Ricasoli Fort. Every one rode or drove, and
dogcarts driven tandem fashion were very popular.

At the custom-house and Calcara Gate there were always
numbers of ponies for hire, but one soon got to know Black Saliba, Saliba in the Ditch, and other stables where to best ponies were to be found.

After a month or so at Malta we were ordered in the *Dreadnought* to Spezza to act as guardship while Queen Victoria was staying at the Villa Fabbricotti near Florence.

Spezzia remains a memory to me of a number of long expeditions to Pisa and Florence and the surrounding country, and also to much boat sailing. We were anchored a good way out, and my captain used to land at the British Consulate on the far side of the bay, some two or three miles.

As a midshipman of the Captain's galley, this meant for me a lot of sailing backwards and forwards or on the still Italian nights the long pull in with a first-class crew was equally delightful. The stroke oar and coxswain, a young leading seaman very shortly after to be rated petty officer, became well known in the service and retired as an admiral. I have often met him since, and Lyne, who started as a boy in the training ship *Impregnable* and came to command the same ship as a post captain, has something to be proud of.

Returning to Malta, the chief feature about this time was the movements of troopships, the *Seraphis*, *Euphrates*, *Crocodile* and other picturesque high-sided, square-rigged steamships, with whom old soldiers covering many years of service, must be very familiar; just now they were busy carrying troops to Egypt for the re-conquest of the Sudan under Kitchener.

In May, the Fleet left Malta for a cruise; there was then no breakwater and the custom was to slip from buoys simultaneously and form up in order of Fleet numbers, on the way out of harbour.

Tactics and the art of handling ships in company had reached great accuracy under Sir George Tryon, and it was customary to exercise what was known as steam tactics every forenoon and afternoon at sea.

The Fleet consisted of the *Victoria* and *Sans Pareil* (sister ships), *Inflexible*, *Duke of Edinburgh*, *Colossus*, *Camperdown*, *Trafalgar*, *Nile*, *Dreadnought* and *Collingwood*, *Polyphemus*, *Arethusa*, *Phaeton*, *Fearless Scout* and *Undaunted*.

A somewhat curious mixture the *Victoria* and *Sans Pareil* with a single turret forward, mounting two 110-ton guns, the earlier Admiral class represented by the *Camperdown* and *Collingwood* to be shortly joined by the *Howe* and *Rodney*, having a barbette at each end mounting 13.5-inch guns with a 6-inch battery amidship, to the *Dreadnought* carrying two turrets on the centre line mounting 12-inch muzzle-loading guns.

The *Dreadnought* had very low freeboard, and was consequently very wet at sea, the upper deck being seldom free from water. She had, however, a high centre superstructure for hoisting boats, access to which was possible from the mess deck, and where both officers and men spent a good deal of time in bad weather at Sea.

On leaving Malta, the Fleet steamed round the *Undaunted*, Captain Lord Charles Beresford, cheering that ship before she parted company for England and paying off. With shorter commissions and much coming and going, both among officers and men in a ship, perhaps paying off means less now. In those days it was usually well into the fourth
year of separation from wives and families and the strains of “Rolling Home” and other tunes played by the bands on these occasions never failed to bring a lump in the throat and a feeling of my turn soon.

The cruise, begun like so many cruises before and since -- Nauplia, Marmoza, Volo, Lemnos, Beyrout, Suda Bay, and many more places familiar to all naval officers -- came to an abrupt end, noted in my log of the time, June 1893: 3.10, *Victoria* rammed by *Camperdown*, sunk in seven minutes. Called away all boats, and so it was, on a perfect afternoon of a Mediterranean summer day, some four hundred lives were lost in less than ten minutes. Of the major issue, the why and wherefore of this accident, much has been written, thrashed out by court-martial and so on, and I propose only to give a short personal description taken from an account written in my log at the time. It was Thursday afternoon “make and mend”; those who had no clothes to make or to mend or preferred to put off the business, were, as custom had it, asleep. We midshipmen to a man, less the watch on deck, were asleep, some on the table, some under, some on the settee which surrounded the table -- space was precious. The gunroom was ventilated by an opening overhead on to the quarter deck and down this ventilator was thrust a head yelling “Away all boats to *Victoria*,” muttered sleepy curses about drilling on a make-and-mend afternoon and a stampede on deck by midshipmen of boats. At that time I was midshipman of the second whaler and the whalers had davits each side of the quarter deck -- all other boats were hoisted up on the superstructure and therefore took a little time to get out. Being on the near side to the *Victoria* and perhaps not more than two hundred yards away I was soon manned and on my way when we were told to come back, the *Victoria* had hoisted the signal “Negative send boats”; presumably the admiral had thought he could still save the ship. As I sat in the boat watching, the ship listed over towards us, at first slowly, officers and men were on the fo'c'sle trying to get a collision mat over the hole, soon they were in the water, they retreated to the top of the turret but the list continued until the water reached the 6-inch gun ports, when with sounds of crashing as upperdeck fittings and bulkheads collapsed, she rolled right over and lay for an appreciable time, bottom up, the propellers revolving in the air and the bottom of the ship showing numbers of men walking about. It needed no further orders to pull to the rescue of what at first looked like a mass of heads bobbing in the water; we had a boatload and it seemed we might well be swamped, but other and many boats were on the scene in a very few minutes. Soon there was no one left to pick up; there was a good deal of heavy timber stowed on the ship's upper deck for target making, these beams of wood and planks, together with the wooden torpedo booms which broke adrift as the ship went down and miscellaneous articles such as cabin furniture and ship's boats, all did great execution among the drowning men.

A description given me by a midshipman we picked up sticks in my mind; most of the midshipmen being responsible for seeing various watertight doors closed were trapped below. This one, however, was stationed on the bridge and he said at first he could see the *Camperdown* was going to strike them, but both ships appeared to be going so slow, it never occured to him there was any great damage, it was just as if one ship gave the other a severe nudge, but as the *Camperdown* drew away he could see the great rent in her bows, and at the same time he felt his own ship beginning to list. The engines were then stopped, but he heard the admiral say something to the captain, and orders being given for the telegraphs to be put ahead, and the ship turned towards the shore which was no great distance off.

I have often heard it said since, that if the ship had been left still there might have been a chance of saving her, or at least more lives. Considering, however, the whole time was seven minutes from the minute she was struck until she sank, it does not appear that anything could have made much practical difference. My friend went on to say, as the ship lay on her beam ends, he jumped and swam away, having a feeling that something would certainly fall on his head; when he thought he was quite clear and swimming away happily he began to go down and he said he went down at a great pace and what seemed a tremendous depth, and all the time he was going down he saw men and wreckage equally quickly shooting upwards. Just as he thought he must burst, he joined the upward current and was shot up to the top again, when he had the good luck to be picked up by one of the boats. After leaving the survivors we had
picked up, in our respective ships, all boats returned and and were working at salving floating wreckage; amongst other things I found myself alongside a chest of drawers, the back of the boar, but we extracted all the clothes, which happened to belong to Jellicoe, at that time commander of the *Victoria*, and afterwards to become famous as Commander of the Grand Fleet in 1914. In the meantime the *Camperdown*, well down by the bow, proceeded slowly into harbour. All that night the boats of the Fleet stood by, while work went on incessantly to save the ship. There was not much sleep for any one, but it interested me to watch from my hammock the chippy chaps fashioning coffins, for it had been decided to hold a combined funeral on shore as early as possible next morning, as it was then thought that many bodies would come to the surface. This was not the case, and I believe none was buried who had not been in the first place picked up alive and afterwards died from injuries.

When it was still scarcely light we passed the *Camperdown* on our way ashore, the water then half-way up to the turret, bows well under, and after-gangways well out of the water. I gathered, the general opinion was that she wouldn't be there when we came back. However, after a long and arduous march, the Turks had, it seems, changed their minds more than once as to where and what ground was to be consecrated as a cemetery. We returned to find the ship on a much more even keel, and it seems after many tries, a certain horizontal door which was open had been closed, allowing the lower forward compartments to be pumped Out.

From Tripoli, the Fleet proceeded to Suda Bay and all
captains went to Malta for the court-martial, the Mediterranean Fleet being *pro tem* commanded by a commander. Suda Bay was a first-class place from a midshipman's point of view, ponies were cheap and good and riding paperchases the order of the day. In between, shooting picnics, which meant sailing perhaps two miles or so down the bay to some place said to be alive with red-legged partridges, usually resulted in walking all day in a blazing sun, with, perhaps, a brace or so; however, it made the bathe and picnic supper just as enjoyable.One day, or night, rather -- it was after dark -- we were fired at from the hillside, presumably by local brigands of whom Crete always has samples; hastily kicking out the file we launched the boat and decamped, leaving a good many odds and ends behind, no doubt exatly as these gentry hoped for.

In August it came to the turn of the *Dreadnought* to pay off. We who had only been out a short time were turned over to the *Hawke* to await the arrival of the *Rodney*, the ship to which we were appointed, and once more, and this time with genuine grief I had to listen to strains of “Rolling Home”, and cheer, although we did not in the least want them to go. The *Hawke* commanded by Captain Pelham Aldrich, had as commander, Cecil Burney; she was a smart ship, none smarter, she was a modern ship, the latest cruiser of the day, and she was far more comfortable below than the old *Dreadnought*, but my word, we midshipmen got our hair curled all right. Cecil Burney believed that midshipmen were there to work, and not go ashore. We kept four watches day and night, harbour and sea, and we were to be in our boats when the boats were wanted, day or night, schooltime or any other time. If we happened to be actually on watch, the watch below had to relieve, the only exception was the duty cutter midshipmen, who kept week on and week off. This job was the plum and usually meant a night in.

In your watch below, you went to school; our haven was
school. On a hot forenoon, after a middle watch, more often than not heads found a resting-place on the table and thought was extremely deep.

However, the *Hawke* wasn't all bad, and we really learnt a lot about ship and boat work and we were lucky to be sent one winter a for two months to Alexandria. Leave was not too easy to come by, but somehow I seem to remember a good many days snipe and duck shooting. A midshipman by name Mason was always, I think, my companion on any expedition which meant carrying a gun. He was, however, a sleepy individual and more often in trouble than I was, and sometimes I had to go alone. Mason was a good and quick shot and there was nothing sleepy about him when snipe or any other game was about. Our general plan of campaign was to land somewhere about 10 p.m. and catch a train which landed us at Abou Houmos (I don't remember if that's the correct way to spell it) about two in the morning. We travelled hard, it was very cheap third class or whatever the bottom class was; arrived at the station we just camped down on the floor of the waiting-room and waited for dawn. Mason could sleep anywhere and at any moment so I had to do the waking up, for no daylight could be missed.

We then collected a couple of the least villainous-looking of the native sportsmen; actually these men were excellent in showing where the snipe were, and ready to go on all day wading about the paddy and cotton-fields, retrieving snipe. I think, perhaps, the neighbourhood of Alexandria in those days provided the largest bags of all the many places in the Mediterranean I’ve shot over. Salonika, in the marshes, ran it close with a more mixed bag. Have you ever been in the marshes at Salonika when there is a wolf about? The din is tremendous, every inhabitant of every far-and-near village starts yelling; all the many and various, and it may be said, dangerous dogs, start barking; and if there was a local, in those days Turkish, gendarme about you would certainly hear a bullet or two whizzing, and it was as well to lie perdu until the hubbub was over. Personally, I was much less afraid of the wolf, generally the solitary type, than the sheepdogs, although these were more frequent and formidable in the foothills and partridge country than in the solitude of the marshes.

I have never had very much success flight shooting at wild fowl. In the *Field* and other sporting papers, it all reads as being so easy. I have tried it all over the world and it seems to me it's very seldom the conditions are real satisfactory; either it's too light or too dark, the wind is wrong or you are just in the wrong position and you can't move for fear of going up to your neck in a frozen waterhole. However, I would like to make Salonika an exception, the flighting there was sometimes really thrilling. The noise of the birds out at sea carried across for miles on a still frosty night; the banging of hundreds and thousands of wings on the water, first the swan, then geese, then all together, mallard, widgeon and all sorts of sheldrake, till it was a case of shoot and load with one ear cocked for the splash and thud of the shot before, and in a few minutes all over, the marsh resumes its quiet, and you whistle to your mate down the line, or already hear him splashing about trying to find the fallen. What a blessing an electric torch is for this job, instead of fumbling about with a lantern, with fingers numbed and matches that are always blown out at the critical moment.

But enough about shooting. There are few places in the Mediterranean I haven't had a try at -- Alexandria, Salonika, Volo, Lemnos, Imbros, Mitylene, Alexandretta, up and down the Sweet Water Canal, and I dare say a dozen more places. If there was one gift I valued more than any other when I was sent off to sea, it was my shotgun, it has given many days in many lands which are hard to beat. There is something about landing in the night and discovering what the country may hold when daylight comes which the stay-at-home shooter never gets. Bags are small, but the joy of country and discovery of the unknown is very great.

The *Rodney*, the ship I was really appointed to, had been delayed, and I had been nearly a year in the *Hawke* before the *Rodney* arrived on the station, and I duly joined.

Here was another type of ship belonging to the Admiral class, two 13.5-inch guns mounted on barbettes each end of the ship with a 6-inch battery amidship.

The outstanding personality in the ship was “Nobby” Hewitt the commander, at that time the youngest commander in the service, straight from promotion from the Royal yacht. A man at that time, good-looking, smart, with it might be supposed, everything pointed to his going right to the top. In all my service I have never met a man so single-minded. He lived for the ship and the service, and perhaps especially the ship, and that perhaps was his eventual downfall. As a commander he was fully occupied, later as a captain he had insufficient interests. As a commander he never went ashore except occasionally on Sunday afternoon, and that is reputed to have been once a year in a commission.

In the *Rodney* we spent much time in the Levant and on the coast of Palestine. It was then 1895, and the Armenian massacres were in full swing; there have been many since.

We lay for many weeks at Volo and Salonika during the Greco-Turkish War, and at Volo, Teddy Hewitt, a brother of our commander and equally well known at one time in the service, came on board. He was a volunteer in the Greek Army, and escaped after the disastrous Battle of Larissa.

Teddy Hewitt had distinguished himself in the Square at Tamai in the Soudan, had left the service, and turned up anywhere where there was fighting to be done. I met him later at the Cape where he had been recently taking part in the second Matabele War, a rolling stone, immensely amusing, wth a fund of stories of wars all over the world, but a little difficult when there was no war handy.

From the Levant we were hurried of to Tangier, where the Germans were endeavouring to establish themselves in Morocco.

What went on over our heads in the political world we in the gunroom knew little of, and possibly cared less, but a memorable drive for pig was from my point of view the *pièce de résistance*. We sallied out at dawn mounted on the backs of the country-bred ponies, armed with service rifles -- Martini Henrys at that time. After a long and delightful ride over the hills we dismounted and formed in a semicircle round the top of a valley thick with scrub and low trees -- a more dangerous disposition considering the arms carried, and the inexperience of most of the sportsmen, I cannot imagine. At the bottom of the valley, some three miles away, a host of beaters and dogs were put in and pandemonium commenced. There were a lot of pig about and they soon began to break. It was snap shooting as they crossed the open spaces in the scrub, but we got, I think, four or five, perhaps more.

And now I was due home. Christmas 1895 found us back at Alexandretta again watching the Turk slaying the Armenian -- dull work I may say, it's a beastly coast to lie off in winter, and we and our Christmas festivities were washed down by vodka and Turkish beer.

The lower-deck Christmas festivities about that period were tremendous, the ship really went mad. Of course there was no going ashore, maybe a certain amount of inferior spirit was smuggled on board, but actually messes used to s before Christmas Day, and it was a pretty fierce orgy. Most officers had to submit to being carried round the lower deck and if they were unpopular, no doubt the carrying was a bit rough. That last Christmas, I had recently changed to being midshipman of the picket boat and I had to go round twice, first with my old cutter's crew, and then with the new one. Of course, the mess decks were all one, broadside and open, the same procession in a modern ship with all her narrow passages and right-angle turns would be most painful. “Nobby” Hewitt was in his element on Christmas Day, urging the men on to really have a boisterous day of it.

Criticism has often been levelled at gunnery and gunnery practices in the '90's. It was no doubt an era when far more time and thought was given to tactics and handling ships than to the precision of weapons, and actually the long-range firing of to-day with the spotting and plotting and so on had not arrived. To make a hit with a muzzle-loading gun was difficult, or even the short 6-inch breechloader on the sliding carriage of those days trained round on a brass racer let into the deck was not conducive to good or quick shooting. A relic of the past was an arrangement in the *Rodney* where the foremost and after 6-inch guns could be traversed across the deck to the engaged side. A primitive form of director firing had arrived and the order used to come down the voice-pipes: “Broadside firing by director.” Each gun was then laid on a bearing and connected up by loose lead to a director-box held by the officer of the battery who pressed the key and fired the battery; but percussion firing was more usual and a battery of six guns mounted in a row, each loaded, the crew on the running-out tackles and the gunlayer standing in the rear, lanyard taut and arm uplifted, ready to fire, was a very different business from the broadside of to-day, each gun in its own turret or casement and controlled entirely from outside.

Division of boarders armed with pikes and tomahawks were still constantly drilled and exercised.

There were days spent in mining and counter-mining. Every ship at that time had a mineroom, and a squadron of battleships could put down a quite big minefield between them. Midshipmen all went through a course of mining, and my particular instructor wo Robert Scott, afterwards of Antarctic fame, then a torpedo lieutenant in the *Hecla*.

Another weapon was the spar torpedo, a charge of guncotton on the end of a long pole which was rigged out over the bows of a steamboat and fired from a battery in the sternsheets.

Ships were provided with anti-torpedo nets hung from booms rigged out from the ship's side.

The idea of the spar torpedo, or outrigger torpedo as it was sometimes called, was to rig the spar out over the net until the charge was in contact with the ship's side, and then to fire it. It meant, apparently, that your enemy must be completely surprised, or very fast asleep, to allow such a leisurely operation.

In February 1896, being then at Alexandretta, orders came through for us, now senior midshipmen, to be sent home. We joined the *Arethusa* for passage to Port Said, and from there embarked in a P. & O. for England, arriving in due course just three years and months since I left. Three years makes a lot of difference between fifteen and eighteen years of age; it had also made a lot of difference at home. Pecuniary affairs had not gone well, and my father had had to give up Wisborough and his Jersey cattle, pigs, and farming he was so fond of, and come to London; also for the cheapter education of my young sisters; but home life was now to be of little interest to me for I was never, or very rarely, at home. After a month’s leave I was appointed to the *Active*, a sailing corvette in the Training Squadron. So far I had had nothing to do with masts and sails since I left the *Britannia*, and I had no desire to renew the acquaintance. Three years in the Fleet had not left an impression that I much wished to renew, and a month on shore in a comfortable bed, and with comfortable meals, made the very idea of going to sea again appalling.

I had had, no doubt, some good times in the Mediterranean, but on the whole I certainly hated it, and approached my father to let me try some other walk of life. I don't remember exactly what he said, mostly not to give up before I really knew anything about it, which no doubt made me furious, as like any other eighteen-year-old I was certain I knew all about it.

