#CHAPTER V

####1899-1900

I was appointed to H.M.S. *Flying Fox*, destroyer in the Portsmouth Command, Commander Meredith in command. We spent most of our time round the Channel ports and the Channel Islands, carrying out a series of night attacks on the Needles channel and Portsmouth for the benefit of the searchlight organization. The Portsmouth flotilla was a period of service I thoroughly enjoyed but I was not there long before being appointed to the *Champion* at Sheerness, once more back to masts and yards.

I joined at Sheerness and found the ship refitting, one lieutenant on board who caught the first train for leave. Sheerness on a wet week-end in winter is not all joy; a ship refitting, a tangled mass of spars and ropes, a dockyard matey, armed with a candle and complete with lammy suit, popping his head out of all sorts of unexpected holes even to the floor of one's cabin, combined with the ship's washing and sanitary arrangements being out of action, necessitating sea-boots and oilskin for a wash or the call of nature, reduced one to a fitting state of humbleness.

It is curious to think the great excitement of that refit was that we were to have steel bottle-screws fitted to replace the ancient dead-eyes and hemp lanyard for setting up rigging.

Very soon after the refit was complete the order came to pay off and commission the *Minerva* at Chatham.

The South African War had broken out, and the four corvettes of the Training Squadron were paid off to commission four modern cruisers, and so ended sail-training in the navy.

As training, especially for officers, it probably could never be equalled, while for the development of the young seamen after even a three-months' cruise it must have been seen to be believed.

In a masted ship the complaint that petty officers were unequal or incapable of taking charge would be impossible.

The captain of a top, the leading hand on the crosstrees, were big men in the ship in every sense of the word, not only must they know their job but be able to make others jump to it. Disrating for failure was much more common than now. A petty officer not up to the work had to go, and quickly; other men's lives depended on it, and the very nature of the work showed, much more easily than now, the worth of either an officer or man. Leading hands and petty officers were chosen entirely for their ability to lead, the schoolmaster had barely arrived and the education test not yet the ruling issue.

Petty officers were rough, or I suppose they would be called rough nowadays; they mostly carried a togie, a short piece of rope with a back splice in it, and they laid it on fairly freely. There was a little Irish captain of the foretop with me, he was a great seaman and as active as a cat. The first bit of a blow on a cruise and the ordinary seamen a bit fearful of a flapping topsail they were reefing, my little Irishman would go dancing out on the yard like a tightrope walker, jumping on their shoulders as they hung on to the jackstay. “Ah, ye little spalpeens it’s cuddling yer mother you think ye are, get hold of the sail you something something sons of something.” Under such gentle pressure in a few weeks you would hardly know them for the same crowd, full of pride at being first top, first ship, first up, or first down from aloft. Never again shall we hear the sharp order and the boatswain's mates take up the cry: “Shorten tail, upper yardmen stand by,” or see the men barefooted, spring on to the sheer pole and crouch waiting for the order: “Way aloft.”

The *Minerva* commissioned, we were detached at first to work as experimental wireless ship. Marconi had just introduced his wireless which was to make such a wonderful difference to our daily lives.

We had a queer set mounted on the charthouse table much to the disgust of the navigator. The set consisted of two large balls pivoted on horizontal rods; as these were adjusted so the electrical discharge flashed across, the longs and shorts produced by the key making a crackling and banging a little alarming.

We had Marconi's assistant on board and I was detailed as his understudy and to attend a series of lectures on board the *Vernon*, on the adaptation of Marconi, as it was then called, to ship use.

The ship lay at Spithead and to attend these lectures meant sailing in, in a whaler or cutter, every morning, leaving possibly at six o'clock in order to get to the *Vernon* at nine according to the tide. Perhaps I learnt more about boat-sailing than wireless. We were sent to Bantry and from there sent messages to the *Majestic*, flagship in the Channel Fleet lying in Plymouth Sound, a great achievement in those days.

The wireless being removed to have alterations and improvements made, I was sent to commission No. 56 torpedo boat, my first command, and I was properly proud of her. We were attached to the Channel Fleet and when not with the Fleet our headquarters were at Glengarriff, a delightful spot, and many charming friends we made there. Our regular duty was to take the mails and provisions out to the Fleet which was carrying out manœuvres on the west coast of Ireland. I often think the faith the admiral (“Tug” Wilson) had in us was amazing. We were given a rendezvous usually at six in the morning which meant leaving long before daylight, at the best a torpedo boat’s compass was erratic, my knowledge of pilotage and navigation distinctly primitive, and the weather often vile; still we always got there more or less on time. The admiral would make: “Come alongside under my lee.” From the big ship's point of view I have often learnt since that “My lee” is a very different thing than from the small ship's point of view. In those days battleships were surrounded by net-shelves, steel shelves right round the ship on which were stowed the torpedo nets. These shelves were a fearsome obstacle in a heaving torpedo boat, if you were caught underneath on a rising sea the result would be disastrous; as it was we usually left, with stanchions bent and guard-rails carried away, retiring into harbour to lick our wounds. We had to carry out a series of night attacks on the Fleet both at sea and in harbour, the first of a very long experience of such attacks in command of torpedo craft and by no means the least exciting, for all night attacks are exciting -- the conditions never the same.

One night, the rendezvous was somewhere west of Kildare, we put out from Bantry. About dark it came on a sou’westerly gale; the compass went, the lights went. I was half-drowned at the wheel, the rest were battened down. I could communicate with the chief engine-room artificer (what splendid chaps the engine-room artificers were in the early days of torpedo boats and destroyers and what a time they must have had) by bawling down a voice-pipe or by pulling a plug by the wheel which rang a gong in the engine-room. The sea was too high to turn her round, quite impossible to get a bearing, and I just nursed her up against it all night. The morning at last came, we were still afloat and Ireland was in sight astern, what part of Ireland who knew?

Still facing it, we gradually worked closer in until we could make out the entrance to Berehaven, a seething mass of broken water, most uninviting. By midday it seemed a little better and I managed to turn her round and head for harbour. There is I think nothing quite so satisfying as the peace and quiet of steaming along in still water after a real good doing in a small ship at sea.

The *Minerva* was now ordered back to Spithead to prepare for a series of experimental trials to determine whether the new water-tube boiler was reliable enough to replace the old Scotch boiler. The trials were to last about a year, five-day trials, ten-day trials, starting-from-cold trials, and all sorts of trials. At first the course was from the Eddystone to Dungeness, up and down the Channel; later we started from Spithead round Alboran Island in the Mediterranean and back; as the winter drew on our headquarters were at Gibraltar, backwards and forwards round Alboran and round the bay -- fairly monotonous work for the watchkeepers. To slow down for fog or weather meant a spoilt trial and start again , so we used to hold on if at all possible. Fine experience really, and I do not know how many times we crossed and recrossed the bay, but it must have been a great many.

The excitement of the dy was steaming round Gibraltar bay, as we came to the end of the beat, to get the news of the South African War signalled off from the semaphore tower. 

Between each trial we had, of course, the dirty business of coaling ship, all the same we got to know Gibraltar well and the Calpe hounds, a great refreshment after a spell at sea.

#####CHINA, 1900-02

The Boxer troubles had started in China and like most young officers I had done my best to get there, without any apparent likelihood of success. The whole world might be at war, but it seemed my lot in life was to steam endless miles in the *Minerva*. However, all things come to an end, and my appointment came to commission the *Albion* at Chatham; Captain Hewitt, my old commander, in the *Rodney*.

The *Albion* was a new ship and as was the practice in those days, we had ten days to commission. The ship's company were marched on board from the old hulk *Pembroke* -- shortly to be replaced by the R.N. Barracks now familiar to all at Chatham. We left Chatham in August, a bad month for the Canal and Red Sea; there were a good many casualties from the heat. In the wardroom we had a punkah fitted the whole length of the table, and a boon it was, but the ventilation of those ships was definitely bad. After Suez we got down to five knots, and every one in the ship, from the captain downwards, was taking a spell in the stokehold. The stokers were a young lot and couldn't stand up to the heat for long at a time. The monsoon was unusually strong, and a most uncomfortable trip we had, battened down, between Aden and Colombo, but Colombo always makes up for a lot -- a swim and dinner at the Galle Face Hotel puts a different complexion on matters. Arrived at Singapore, we found we were to stop there for a month, our last chance of seeing something of the trouble up north was goin. Singapore is not a bad place, hot of course, and I do not know that I envy people whose business keeps them there years on end. But for an occasional visit, it is rather delightful, with always a most sporting community. A visiting ship is bound to take on various clubs at cricket, hockey, golf, boat racing, not to speak of bowling at the club in the evening. I played rugby there one day against Singapore, and immediately after the game rowed a two-mile race in fours against the Singapore Rowing Club; something of a record in exercise and what a place to choose for it.

Our celebrities in the *Albion* were first the Captain, an extraordinary product of the service -- as I have remarked before -- a man with no interests outside the service and with no sort of recreation. At that time he was on the verge of a mental breakdown. James, the commander, had been specially and recently promoted for his energy and skill in getting a 12-pounder gun to the top of Spion Kop; his energy and physical strength were very definitely apparent, he was a good golfer, but perhaps all these virtues did not complete the make-up required, for the commander of a battleship.

Poor Nobby developed a craze for annoying the flagship, the *Glory*, and developing all sorts of queer evolutions. He would come off late from the club, change into a monkeyjacket, or perhaps not even that, and order the boatswain's mate to pipe “Clear lower deck, let go bower anchor, and weigh by hand.” Then having got every one turned out and running about would sound the “Still”, and pipe down. Naturally in the morning a signal would be made by the flagship: “Why were you working your cables at midnight last night.” To which the bland reply read: “Inquiries have been made and nothing is known of this.” Nothing more was said and Nobby enjoyed the joke immensely. He went so far as to have a special party who, at oda hours, would do some unusual drill and then wait for a signal of inquiry, to be met by the usual flat denial. Of course this sort of thing could not go on for long and we were sent for a month to Amoy, ostensibly to work up, but I can imagine the C.-in-C. was sick and tired of us. Amoy, in those days, was a charming place, with a very nice English community. There was plenty of snipe and duck shooting on the mainland, and cricket on the island, run by Mackintosh the popular manager of the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank. Simpson was the head of the Customs department; he had several remarkably pretty daughters and a son, afterwards to become well known as Putnam Weale.

We were sorry to leave Amoy, and in due course returned to Hong Kong to await the arrival of the Rear Admiral, Sir Harry Grenfell. Things went from bad to worse, and one of the last episodes occurred when the G.O.C. was making his official call. Nobby had shown him all the tricks, from hoisting out a 6-inch gun in record time to dressing ship. He then took him into his cabin for a little refreshment and said: “Now I'll show something a little special.” He had two messenger boys who were trained, when he said “Man overboard", to whip off their clothes and jump overboard through the after-gun port; then he would take the time it took the boat to pick them up. He rang the bell, in came the messenger, and as soon as he got the order “Man overboard”, commenced to strip off his jumper and trousers, but this was too much for the army, the general fled on deck and the story, suitably embroidered, soon went round Hong Kong. Then the admiral arrived and the end soon came. We were due to dock in Kowloon, a heavier and larger ship than usually handled by the Kowloon Dock Company that time and it was essential we should be pointed in the dock exactly at slack water. At the time appointed we were all on the bridge, but no captain; the time came when we should slip from the buoy and Kiddle, the navigating commander told me to go down and persuade the captain to come up. He eventually did, but was more than usually queer. Kiddle told me to keep him talking, while he got the ship over and into dock. By the time we got over, the tide had begun to ebb and it was a little difficult. The only remark poor Nobby made was: “What fun if the old ship got toggled across the end of the dock.” That was Nobby Hewitt's last public appearance; an hour later he went to hospital and from there he was invalided home, to die not long afterwards, I believe in great poverty, having mortgaged his pension for lodging and so much a week pocket money. Admiral Lord Wemyss told me, years afterwards, he was the only N.O. at Nobby's funeral. And so ended what seemed at one time to have everything set for a brilliant Career.

To replace Hewitt, we had Pakenham appointed as acting captain; he came from the *Nymphe*. Another outstanding character, and how different: immaculately turned out, every button just right, a clean pair of white kid gloves, it seemed twice a day, a rather excessively polite manner, a keen sense of humour and a witty tongue.

The first day he was to put us through our paces. We all, officers and ship's company, fallen-in on the fo'c'sle. The captain immaculate, the commander showing signs of wear and tear, standing on the barbette. Captain James “read the stations, for the ship's company, to abandon the ship”. Paks never missed a word, poor James always stammered; I had a feeling that he had been writing up an order book most of the night and perhaps hadn't got as far as "Abandon the ship". He blurted out: “No need to read, sir, they all know their stations” -- which was true enough. “Captain James, I would like to hear the stations read first”; a long pause, with everyone feeling very hot and then something was read: "That will do, Captain James, I am afraid either you will leave the ship or I shall, the ship's company can fall out.” And so James went home, and eventually Jerram arrived as captain, and Tam Field, my old sub of *Dreadnought* days, as commander -- a fine combination, but I was not much longer in the *Albion*. To my surprise I had a letter from my old commander in the *Minerva*, Norman Palmer, telling me the Admiralty had decided to provide organized physical training in the navy, as a partial substitute for the training given by masts and yards, and would I go to Aldershot, there to go through the army course with five others. I took the letter to the captain for his advice. He was rather against my going, but he said: “It is a new thing, it may pan out, and it may not. You may find yourself sidetracked; anyway, you will find it pretty unpopular in the service, much better stay here.” In spite of all that, the something new always did appeal to me and so I said, if he would let me go, I'd like to try. Then I had to see the admiral, to whom I had been temporarily acting as flag-lieutenant. Harry Grenfell had been a great boxer in his day and an all-round sportsman. He was always pretty blunt and very conservative. “Sounds a tomfool business to me; I suppose you'll teach the sailor to skip and turn cartwheels,” which actually was pretty much what we did, although I had no idea what we were going to either learn or teach. “What are you going to the army for?” I said: “I supposed they knew all about it, and we were going to learn from them.” “Oh well,” he said, “they'll give you a good time.” When I was stiff and sore all over, after a day in the gym at Aldershot, I remembered that good time. However, I went and also managed to get a passage East by the Canadian Pacific *Empress of Japan*, and so completed the journey round the world. I met a nice German on that voyage, who was afterwards most helpful, otherwise the voyage was the same as any other. We duly admired the Rockies, got snowed up for a few hours at Banff, and arrived in New York in March 1902. I was really bound for Halifax, but was easily persuaded I must see New York and the Niagara Falls, and that by catching the *Oceanic* at New York I should be in England just as quick. The only difference was that it was a good deal more expensive and started a correspondence which lasted for years, with the Admiralty department as to the why and wherefore, and after all I had -- very properly I suppose -- to pay the difference. Before leaving this, my first spell on the China station, a few remarks may be of interest of the China and Japan of 1900.

In China the Dowager Empress still reigned in Peking, but the old Buddha, as she was called, had received a severe blow as the result of the Boxer troubles and the subsequent occupation of Peking by the Allied nations.

We lay off the Taku bar for some weeks and I went up to Tientsin, still in occupation by the foreign armies, under the German C.-in-C, von Waldersee. Our British contingent was mostly from India but the fighting was all over and the troops were gradually being withdrawn.

We also -- in the *Albion* --visited Nanking. When one thinks of Nanking of the present day, it is interesting to look back on it, as it was then, a heavily guarded, walled city. The walls were so thick that the entrance gates, closed at sunset were virtually tunnels, dark and dirty, and the haunt of innumerable beggars. Much of the city had been destroyed in the time of the Taiping rebellion and there were largе tracks of open country inside the walls, and quite good pheasant and woodcock shooting in which was nominally the city.

An interesting ceremony was the return call by the Viceroy, on the admiral. He came complete with yellow jacket, jade button and peacock feather, carried in a highly ornamental chair, proceeded by bannermen and surrounded by a personal bodyguard in the viceregal uniform carrying spears. As he emerged from the gates and passed through the crowded villages, which lay outside the wall and between the city and the river, every one went down on their knees, noses to the ground, in a deep kowtow. Here was the height of the Manchu dynasty so shortly after to disappear, after some three hundred years. All the Chinese then wore the pigtail, and had for so long that few remembered it was a badge imposed on them by the Manchus and that only the Manchus themselves, or at least the officials, wore no pigtails and were, therefore, unfortunately conspicuous when a few years later the revolution broke out and Manchus throughout China were ruthlessly exterminated. Such a happening seemed very far off at that time. China was entirely peaceful, and from the outsider's point of view exceedingly well governed. A foreigner, although immediately after the Boxer (anti-Christian) rebellion, was perfectly safe in the Yangtze valley. It never occurred to us away shooting up and down the river and surrounding country that we should be anything but safe; a very different tale from the neighbourhood of Nanking, thirty years later. Pukow and the Peking railway did not then exist and one of the best bits of snipe shooting about at that time is where the engine and goods yards of Pukow now stands.

Japan, too, in 1900 was very different. We still had a British concession on the Bluff at Yokohama, and in the concession stood a British naval hospital, incidently a very charming spot. We cruised round Japan visiting Nagasaki, Kobe, Yokohama, Hakodate, and many lesser places, being entertained at the Maple Club in Tokyo, meeting Admiral Togo, so soon to become famous in the Russo-Japanese war. So to the end of my first spell on the China station, a memory of rather a queer ship, charming and delightfully hospitable friends on shore, and sport of all kinds in abundance.